Microsoft  C - RUN-TIME LIBRARY REFERENCE








────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                Microsoft (R) C - RUN-TIME LIBRARY REFERENCE

                                FOR THE MS-DOS (R)
                                OPERATING SYSTEM
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


                            MICROSOFT CORPORATION








PUBLISHED BY
Microsoft Press
A Division of Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way, Redmond, Washington 98052-6399

Copyright (C)  1990 by Microsoft Press

All rights reserved. No part of the contents of this book may be reproduced
or transmitted in any form or by any means without the written permission of
the publisher.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Microsoft C run-time library reference.

Includes  index.
1. C (Computer program language) 2. Microsoft C
(Computer program) 3. Macro instructions (Electronic
computers) I. Microsoft.
QA76.73.C15M52  1990         005.13'3         89-12240
ISBN 1-55615-225-6

Printed and bound in the United States of America.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  HCHC 3 2 1 0 9

Distributed to the book trade in Canada by General Publishing Company, Ltd.

Distributed to the book trade outside the United States and Canada by
Penguin
Books  Ltd.

Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England
Penguin Books Australia Ltd., Ringwood, Victoria, Australia
Penguin Books N.Z. Ltd., 182-190 Wairau Road, Auckland 10, New Zealand

British Cataloging in Publication Data available.

                                            Sample
Writers:           Editors:                 Programs:
Phil Nelson        Amanda Clark             Bruce McKinney
Terry Ward         Moira Macdonald
                    Marjorie Manwaring
                    Bill Nolan

Microsoft, the Microsoft logo, MS-DOS, QuickC, and XENIX are
registered trademarks and Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation.

AT&T and UNIX are registered trademarks of American Telephone
and Telegraph Company.

Hercules is a registered trademark of Hercules Computer
Technology.

IBM is a registered trademark of International Business
Machines Corporation.

Olivetti is a registered trademark of Ing. C. Olivetti.

Document No. 410840021-520-R00-1088
Part No. 04412




Table of Contents
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────



Introduction
        About the C Run-Time Library
            ANSI C Compatibility
            OS/2 and XENIX(R) Programming
            Expanded Graphics Library
        About This Book
        Other Books of Interest
        Document Conventions


PART I  Overview
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Chapter 1  Using C Library Routines

        1.1   Calling Library Routines
        1.2   Using Header Files
            1.2.1    Including Necessary Definitions
            1.2.2    Including Function Declarations
        1.3   File Names and Path Names
        1.4   Choosing Between Functions and Macros
        1.5   Stack Checking on Entry
        1.6   Handling Errors
        1.7   Operating-System Considerations
        1.8   Floating-Point Support
        1.9   Using Huge Arrays with Library Functions

Chapter 2  Run-Time Routines by Category

        2.1   Buffer Manipulation
        2.2   Character Classification and Conversion
        2.3   Data Conversion
        2.4   Directory Control
        2.5   File Handling
        2.6   Graphics
            2.6.1    Low-Level Graphics and Character-Font Functions
            2.6.2    Presentation-Graphics Functions
        2.7   Input and Output
            2.7.1    Text and Binary Modes
            2.7.2    Stream Routines
            2.7.3    Low-Level Routines
            2.7.4    Console and Port I/O
        2.8   Internationalization
        2.9   Math
        2.10  Memory Allocation
            2.10.1   Near and Far Heaps
            2.10.2   Based Heaps
        2.11  Process and Environment Control
        2.12  Searching and Sorting
        2.13  String Manipulation
        2.14  System Calls
            2.14.1   BIOS Interface
            2.14.2   DOS Interface
        2.15  Time
        2.16  Variable-Length Argument Lists

Chapter 3  Global Variables and Standard Types

        3.1   _amblksiz
        3.2   daylight, timezone, tzname
        3.3   _doserrno, errno, sys_errlist, sys_nerr
        3.4   _fmode
        3.5   _osmajor, _osminor, _osmode, _osversion
        3.6   environ
        3.7   _psp
        3.8   Standard Types


PART II  Run-Time Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

        About the Run-Time Reference
            abort
            abs
            access
            acos Functions
            alloca
            _arc Functions
            asctime
            asin Functions
            assert
            atan Functions
            atexit
            atof, atoi, atol, _atold
            bdos
            _beginthread
            Bessel Functions
            _bfreeseg
            _bheapseg
            _bios_disk
            _bios_equiplist
            _bios_keybrd
            _bios_memsize
            _bios_printer
            _bios_serialcom
            _bios_timeofday
            bsearch
            cabs, cabsl
            calloc Functions
            ceil, ceill
            _cexit, _c_exit
            cgets
            _chain_intr
            chdir
            _chdrive
            chmod
            chsize
            _clear87
            clearerr
            _clearscreen
            clock
            close
            _control87
            cos Functions
            cprintf
            cputs
            creat
            cscanf
            ctime
            cwait
            dieeetomsbin, dmsbintoieee
            difftime
            _displaycursor
            div
            _dos_allocmem
            _dos_close
            _dos_creat Functions
            _dos_find Functions
            _dos_freemem
            _dos_getdate
            _dos_getdiskfree
            _dos_getdrive
            _dos_getfileattr
            _dos_getftime
            _dos_gettime
            _dos_getvect
            _dos_keep
            _dos_open
            _dos_read
            _dos_setblock
            _dos_setdate
            _dos_setdrive
            _dos_setfileattr
            _dos_setftime
            _dos_settime
            _dos_setvect
            _dos_write
            dosexterr
            dup, dup2
            ecvt
            _ellipse Functions
            _enable
            _endthread
            eof
            exec Functions
            exit, _exit
            exp, expl
            _expand Functions
            fabs, fabsl
            fclose, fcloseall
            fcvt
            fdopen
            feof
            ferror
            fflush
            fgetc, fgetchar
            fgetpos
            fgets
            fieeetomsbin, fmsbintoieee
            filelength
            fileno
            _floodfill, _floodfill_w
            floor, floorl
            flushall
            fmod, fmodl
            fopen
            FP_OFF, FP_SEG
            _fpreset
            fprintf
            fputc, fputchar
            fputs
            fread
            free Functions
            _freect
            freopen
            frexp, frexpl
            fscanf
            fseek
            fsetpos
            _fsopen
            fstat
            ftell
            ftime
            _fullpath
            fwrite
            gcvt
            _getactivepage
            _getarcinfo
            _getbkcolor
            getc, getchar
            getch, getche
            _getcolor
            _getcurrentposition Functions
            getcwd
            _getdcwd
            _getdrive
            getenv
            _getfillmask
            _getfontinfo
            _getgtextextent
            _getimage Functions
            _getlinestyle
            _getphyscoord
            getpid
            _getpixel Functions
            gets
            _gettextcolor
            _gettextcursor
            _gettextposition
            _gettextwindow
            _getvideoconfig
            _getviewcoord Functions
            _getvisualpage
            getw
            _getwindowcoord
            _getwritemode
            gmtime
            _grstatus
            halloc
            _hard Functions
            _heapadd Functions
            _heapchk Functions
            _heapmin Functions
            _heapset Functions
            _heapwalk Functions
            hfree
            hypot, hypotl
            _imagesize Functions
            inp, inpw
            int86
            int86x
            intdos
            intdosx
            is Functions
            isatty
            itoa
            kbhit
            labs
            ldexp, ldexpl
            ldiv
            lfind
            _lineto Functions
            localeconv
            localtime
            locking
            log Functions
            long double Functions
            longjmp
            _lrotl, _lrotr
            lsearch
            lseek
            ltoa
            _makepath
            malloc Functions
            matherr, _matherrl
            max
            _memavl
            memccpy, _fmemccpy
            memchr, _fmemchr
            memcmp, _fmemcmp
            memcpy, _fmemcpy
            memicmp, _fmemicmp
            _memmax
            memmove, _fmemmove
            memset, _fmemset
            min
            mkdir
            mktemp
            mktime
            modf, modfl
            movedata
            _moveto Functions
            _msize Functions
            onexit
            open
            _outgtext
            _outmem
            outp, outpw
            _outtext
            _pclose
            perror
            _pg_analyzechart Functions
            _pg_analyzepie
            _pg_analyzescatter Functions
            _pg_chart Functions
            _pg_chartscatter Functions
            _pg_chartpie
            _pg_defaultchart
            _pg_getchardef
            _pg_getpalette
            _pg_getstyleset
            _pg_hlabelchart
            _pg_initchart
            _pg_resetpalette
            _pg_resetstyleset
            _pg_setchardef
            _pg_setpalette
            _pg_setstyleset
            _pg_vlabelchart
            _pie Functions
            _pipe
            _polygon Functions
            _popen
            pow Functions
            printf
            putc, putchar
            putch
            putenv
            _putimage Functions
            puts
            putw
            qsort
            raise
            rand
            read
            realloc Functions
            _rectangle Functions
            _registerfonts
            _remapallpalette, _remappalette
            remove
            rename
            rewind
            rmdir
            rmtmp
            _rotl, _rotr
            scanf
            _scrolltextwindow
            _searchenv
            segread
            _selectpalette
            _setactivepage
            _setbkcolor
            setbuf
            _setcliprgn
            _setcolor
            _setfillmask
            _setfont
            _setgtextvector
            setjmp
            _setlinestyle
            setlocale
            setmode
            _setpixel Functions
            _settextcolor
            _settextcursor
            _settextposition
            _settextrows
            _settextwindow
            setvbuf
            _setvideomode
            _setvideomoderows
            _setvieworg
            _setviewport
            _setvisualpage
            _setwindow
            _setwritemode
            signal
            sin Functions
            sopen
            spawn Functions
            _splitpath
            sprintf
            sqrt, sqrtl
            srand
            sscanf
            stackavail
            stat
            _status87
            strcat, _fstrcat
            strchr, _fstrchr
            strcmp, _fstrcmp
            strcmpi
            strcoll
            strcpy, _fstrcpy
            strcspn, _fstrcspn
            _strdate
            strdup Functions
            strerror, _strerror
            strftime
            stricmp, _fstricmp
            strlen, _fstrlen
            strlwr, _fstrlwr
            strncat, _fstrncat
            strncmp, _fstrncmp
            strncpy, _fstrncpy
            strnicmp, _fstrnicmp
            strnset, _fstrnset
            strpbrk, _fstrpbrk
            strrchr, _fstrrchr
            strrev, _fstrrev
            strset, _fstrset
            strspn, _fstrspn
            strstr, _fstrstr
            _strtime
            strtod, strtol, _strtold, strtoul
            strtok, _fstrtok
            strupr, _fstrupr
            strxfrm
            swab
            system
            tan Functions
            tell
            tempnam, tmpnam
            time
            tmpfile
            toascii, tolower, toupper Functions
            tzset
            ultoa
            umask
            ungetc
            ungetch
            unlink
            _unregisterfonts
            utime
            va_arg, va_end, va_start
            vfprintf, vprintf, vsprintf
            wait
            _wrapon
            write

Index




Introduction
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The Microsoft(R) C Run-Time Library is a set of over 500 ready-to-use
functions and macros designed for use in C programs. The run-time library
makes programming easier by providing


    ■   Fast and efficient routines to perform common programming tasks (such
        as string manipulation), sparing you the time and effort needed to
        write such routines

    ■   Reliable methods of performing operating-system functions (such as
        opening and closing files)


The C run-time library is important because it provides basic functions not
provided by the C language itself. These functions include input and output,
memory allocation, process control, graphics, and many others.

This book describes the Microsoft C run-time library routines included with
the Microsoft Professional Development System version 6.0. These comprise
all of the routines included with earlier versions of Microsoft C, as well
as many new routines.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
NOTE

Microsoft documentation uses the term "OS/2" to refer to the OS/2
systems─Microsoft Operating System/2 (MS(R) OS/2) and IBM(R) OS/2.
Similarly, the term "DOS" refers to both the MS-DOS(R) and IBM Personal
Computer DOS operating systems. The name of a specific operating system is
used when it is necessary to note features that are unique to that system.
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


About the C Run-Time Library

The Microsoft C run-time library contains a number of new routines and
features which support American National Standards Institute (ANSI) C
compatibility, OS/2 and XENIX(R) programming, and sophisticated graphics
programming.

To ease the task of transporting programs from one operating system to
another, the description of each library routine includes compatibility
boxes, which show at a glance whether the routine is compatible with ANSI C,
MS-DOS, OS/2, UNIX(R), and XENIX. (In this book, references to XENIX systems
also encompass UNIX and other UNIX-like systems.)


ANSI C Compatibility

The C run-time library routines are designed for compatibility with the ANSI
C standard, which Microsoft C compilers support. The major innovation of
ANSI C is to permit argument-type lists in function prototypes
(declarations). Given the information in the function prototype, the
compiler can check later references to the function to make sure that the
references use the correct number and type of arguments and the correct
return value.

To take advantage of the compiler's type-checking ability, the include files
that accompany the C run-time library have been expanded. In addition to the
definitions and declarations required by library routines, the include files
now contain function declarations with argument-type lists. Several new
include files have also been added. The names of these files are chosen to
maximize compatibility with the ANSI C standard and with XENIX and UNIX
names.


OS/2 and XENIX(R) Programming

Microsoft C run-time library routines are designed to maintain maximum
compatibility between MS-DOS, OS/2, and XENIX or UNIX systems. The library
offers a number of operating-system interface routines that allow you to
take advantage of specific DOS and OS/2 features.

Most of the functions in the C library for DOS and OS/2 are compatible with
like-named routines in the C library for XENIX. For additional
compatibility, the math library functions have been extended to provide
exception handling in the same manner as the UNIX System V math functions.


Expanded Graphics Library

The Microsoft C run-time library now contains over one hundred graphics
routines. The core of this library consists of several dozen low-level
graphics routines, which allow your programs to select video modes, set
points, draw lines, change colors, and draw shapes such as rectangles and
ellipses. You can display real-valued data, such as floating-point values,
within windows of different sizes by using various coordinate systems.

Recent additions to the graphics library include presentation graphics and
fonts. The presentation-graphics library provides powerful tools for adding
presentation-quality graphics to your programs. These routines can display
data as a variety of graphs, including pie charts, bar and column charts,
line graphs, and scatter diagrams.

The fonts library allows your programs to display various styles and sizes
of text in graphics images or charts. You can use font-manipulation routines
with any graphics routines that display text, including presentation
graphics.


About This Book

This book assumes that you understand the C language and know how to compile
and link programs. If you have questions about these subjects, consult your
compiler documentation.

This book has two parts. Part 1, "Overview," introduces the Microsoft C
library. It describes general rules for using the library and summarizes the
main categories of library routines. Part 1 contains the following chapters:



    ■   Chapter 1, "Using C Library Routines," gives general rules for
        understanding and using C library routines and mentions special
        considerations that apply to certain routines. It is recommended that
        you read this chapter before using the run-time library; you may also
        want to turn to Chapter 1 when you have questions about library
        procedures.

    ■   Chapter 2, "Run-Time Routines by Category," lists the C library
        routines by category and discusses considerations that apply to each
        category. This chapter makes it easy to locate routines by task. Once
        you find the routine you want, turn to the reference page in Part 2
        for a detailed description.

    ■   Chapter 3, "Global Variables and Standard Types," describes variables
        and types that are used by library routines. Global variables and
        standard types are also described in the reference descriptions of the
        routines that use them.


Part 2, "Run-Time Functions," describes the library routines in alphabetical
order. Once you are familiar with the C library rules and procedures, you
will probably use this part most often.


Other Books of Interest

This book provides a guide to the C run-time library provided with the
Microsoft C Professional Development System version 6.0.

The following books cover a variety of topics that you may find useful. They
are listed only for your convenience. With the exception of its own
publications, Microsoft does not endorse these books or recommend them over
others on the same subject.


    ■   Barkakati, Nabajyoti. The Waite Group's Microsoft C Bible.
        Indianapolis, IN: Howard W. Sams, 1988.

        A topical guide to the Microsoft C run-time library. A similar volume
        is available for the Microsoft QuickC(R) product.

    ■   Campbell, Joe. C Programmer's Guide to Serial Communications.
        Indianapolis, IN: Howard W. Sams & Company, 1987.

        A comprehensive guide to the specialized area of serial communication
        programming in C.

    ■   Hansen, Augie. Proficient C: The Microsoft Guide to Intermediate &
        Advanced C Programming. Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 1987.

        An intermediate-level guide to C programming.

    ■   Harbison, Samuel P., and Guy L. Steele, Jr. C: A Reference Manual, 2d
        ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1987.

        A comprehensive guide to the C language and the standard library.

    ■   Kernighan, Brian W., and Dennis M. Ritchie. The C Programming
        Language, 2d ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988.

        The first edition of this book is the classic definition of the C
        language. The second edition includes new information on the proposed
        ANSI C standard.

    ■   Lafore, Robert. Microsoft C Programming for the IBM. Indianapolis, IN:
        Howard W. Sams & Company, 1987.

        The first half of this book teaches C. The second half concentrates on
        specifics of the PC environment, such as BIOS calls, memory, and video
        displays.

    ■   Mark Williams Company. ANSI C: A Lexical Guide. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
        Prentice Hall, 1988.

        A dictionary-style guide to the ANSI C standard.

    ■   Plauger, P. J., and Jim Brodie. Standard C. Redmond, WA: Microsoft
        Press, 1989.

        A quick reference guide to the ANSI C implementation by the secretary
        and chairman of the ANSI-authorized C Programming Language Standards
        Committee.

    ■   Plum, Thomas. Reliable Data Structures in C. Cardiff, NJ: Plum Hall,
        1985.

        An intermediate-level look at data structures using the C language.

    ■   Plum, Thomas, and Jim Brodie. Efficient C. Cardiff, NJ: Plum Hall,
        1985.

        A guide to techniques for increasing the efficiency of C programs.

    ■   Press, William H., Brian P. Flannery, Saul A. Teukolsky, and William
        T. Vetterling. Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific
        Computing. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

        A comprehensive look at numerical techniques using the C language.

    ■   Schustack, Steve. Variations in C: Programming Techniques for
        Developing Efficient Professional Applications. Redmond, WA: Microsoft
        Press, 1985.

        An intermediate-level guide to developing business applications in C.

    ■   Ward, Robert. Debugging C. Indianapolis, IN: Que Corporation, 1986.

        An advanced guide to the theory and practice of debugging C programs.

    ■   Wilton, Richard. Programmer's Guide to PC and PS/2 Video
        Systems:Maximum Video Performance from the EGA, VGA, HGC, & MCGA.
        Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 1987.

        An advanced guide to all the PC and PS/2 video modes.



Document Conventions

This book uses the following document conventions :

Example                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
STDIO.H                           Uppercase letters indicate file names,
                                    segment names, registers, and terms used
                                    at the operating-system command level.

_far                              Boldface letters indicate C keywords,
                                    operators, language-specific characters,
                                    and library routines. Within discussions
                                    of syntax, bold type indicates that the
                                    text must be entered exactly as shown.

expression                        Words in italics indicate placeholders
                                    for information you must supply, such as
                                    a file name. Italics are also
                                    occasionally used for emphasis in the
                                    text.

[[option]]                        Items inside double square brackets are
                                    optional.

#pragma pack {1|2}                Braces and a vertical bar indicate a
                                    choice among two or more items. You must
                                    choose one of these items unless double
                                    square brackets surround the braces.

#include <io.h>                   This font is used for examples, user
                                    input, program output, and error
                                    messages in text.

CL options [[files...]]           Three dots following an item indicate
                                    that more items having the same form may
                                    appear.

while()                           A column of three dots tells you that
{                                 part of the example program has been
    .                              intentionally omitted.
    .
    .
}

CTRL+ENTER                        Small capital letters are used for the
                                    names of keys on the keyboard. When you
                                    see a plus sign (+) between two key
                                    names, you should hold down the first
                                    key while pressing the second.

                                    The carriage-return key, sometimes
                                    marked as a bent arrow on the keyboard,
                                    is called ENTER.

"argument"                        Quotation marks enclose a new term the
                                    first time it is defined in text.

"C string"                        Some C constructs, such as strings,
                                    require quotation marks. Quotation marks
                                    required by the language have the form "
                                    " and ' ' rather than " " and ' '.

Color Graphics Adapter (CGA)      The first time an acronym is used, it is
                                    often spelled out.






PART I  Overview
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The first part of this book provides an overview of the run-time library
provided with the Microsoft C Professional Development System.

Chapter 1 is a general guide to the use of the run-time library routines.

Chapter 2 lists the routines by category.

Chapter 3 tells how to access global variables and types defined in the
run-time library.






Chapter 1  Using C Library Routines
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

This chapter provides basic information about how to use Microsoft C library
routines. It also describes some special rules, such as file- and path-name
conventions, that apply to particular routines. You should read this chapter
before you begin to use C library routines, and you may also want to refer
back to it if you have questions about library procedures.


1.1  Calling Library Routines

To use a C library routine, simply call it in your program, just as if it is
defined there. For instance, suppose you write the following program and
name it SAMPLE.C:

    #include <stdio.h>
    main()
    {
        printf( "Microsoft C" );
    }

The program prints  Microsoft C  by calling the printf routine, which is
part of the standard C library. Calling a library routine normally involves
two groups of files:


    1.  Header ("include") files that contain declarations and type
        definitions required by library routines

    2.  Library files that contain the library routines in compiled form


Header files and library files are both included with Microsoft C. Header
files are used when compiling, and library files are used when linking.

You include the necessary header files in your program source code with
#include directives. The description of each library routine in Part 2,
"Reference," tells you what header file the routine requires. Since printf
requires the STDIO.H header file, the SAMPLE.C program contains the
following line:

    #include <stdio.h>

This line causes the compiler to insert the contents of STDIO.H into the
source file SAMPLE.C.

After you compile the source file, you link the resulting object (.OBJ) file
with the appropriate library (.LIB) file to create an executable (.EXE)
file. Your object file contains the name of every routine that your program
calls, including library routines. If a routine is not defined in your
program, the linker searches for its code in a library file and includes
that code in the executable file.

Normally, the code for standard library routines is contained in the
"default library" that you create when installing Microsoft C. Since the
linker automatically searches the default library, you do not need to
specify that library's name when linking your program. The following command
links the example program with the default library:

    link sample,,,;

If you call a library routine that is not contained in the default library,
you must give the linker the name of the library file that contains the
routine. For instance, suppose your program uses a Microsoft C graphics
routine and you did not make GRAPHICS.LIB part of your default library when
installing Microsoft C. You would then link the program using a line like
the following:

    link sample,,, graphics.lib;

For more information about libraries and linking, consult the installation
documentation for your compiler.


1.2  Using Header Files

As stated in the previous section, you should include C header files when
using library routines. This section describes particular reasons why header
files are required.


1.2.1  Including Necessary Definitions

Many C library routines use constants, type definitions, or macros defined
in a header file. To use the routine, you must include the header file
containing the needed definition(s). The following list gives examples:

Definition                        Example
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
Macro                             If a library routine is implemented as a
                                    macro, the macro definition appears in a
                                    header file. For instance, the toupper
                                    macro is defined in the header file
                                    CTYPE.H.

Manifest constant                 Many library routines refer to constants
                                    that are defined in header files. For
                                    instance, the open routine uses
                                    constants such as O_CREAT, which is
                                    defined in the header file FCNTL.H.

Type definition                   Some library routines return a structure
                                    or take a structure as an argument. For
                                    example, stream input/output routines
                                    use a structure of type FILE, which is
                                    defined in STDIO.H.


1.2.2  Including Function Declarations

The Microsoft C header files also contain function declarations for every
function in the C library. These declarations are in the style recommended
by the ANSI C standard. Given these declarations, the compiler can perform
"type checking" on every reference to a library function, making sure that
you have used the correct return type and arguments. Function declarations
are sometimes called "prototypes," since the declaration serves as a
prototype or template for every subsequent reference to the function.

A function declaration lists the name of the function, its return type, and
the number and type of its arguments. For instance, below is the declaration
of the pow library function from the header file MATH.H:

    double pow( double x, double y );

The example declares that pow returns a value of type double and takes two
arguments of type double. Given this declaration, the compiler can check
every reference to pow in your program to ensure that the reference passes
two double arguments to pow and takes a return value of type double.

The compiler can perform type checking only for function references that
appear after the function declaration. Because of this, function
declarations normally appear near the beginning of the source file, prior to
any use of the functions they declare.

Function declarations are especially important for functions that return a
value of some type other than int, which is the default. For example, the
pow function returns a double value. If you do not declare such a function,
the compiler treats its return value as int, which can cause unexpected
results.

It is also a good practice to provide declarations for functions that you
write. If you do not want to type the declarations by hand, you can generate
them automatically by using the /Zg compiler option. This option causes the
compiler to generate ANSI-standard function declarations for every function
defined in the current source file. Redirect this output to a file, then
insert the file near the beginning of your source file.

Your program can contain more than one declaration of the same function, as
long as the declarations do not conflict. This is important if you have old
programs whose function declarations do not contain argument-type lists. For
instance, if your program contains the declaration

    char *calloc( );

you can later include the following declaration:

    char *calloc(unsigned, unsigned);

Because the two declarations are compatible, even though they are not
identical, no conflict occurs. The second declaration simply gives more
information about function arguments than the second. A conflict would
arise, however, if the declarations gave a different number of arguments or
gave arguments of different types.

Some library functions can take a variable number of arguments. For
instance, the printf function can take one argument or several. The compiler
can perform only limited type checking on such functions, a factor that
affects the following library functions:


    ■   In calls to cprintf, cscanf, printf, and scanf, only the first
        argument (the format string) is type checked.

    ■   In calls to fprintf, fscanf, sprintf, and sscanf, only the first two
        arguments (the file or buffer and the format string) are type checked.

    ■   In calls to open, only the first two arguments (the path name and the
        open flag) are type checked.

    ■   In calls to sopen, only the first three arguments (the path name, the
        open flag, and the sharing mode) are type checked.

    ■   In calls to execl, execle, execlp, and execlpe, only the first two
        arguments (the path name and the first argument pointer) are type
        checked.

    ■   In calls to spawnl, spawnle, spawnlp, and spawnlpe, only the first
        three arguments (the mode flag, the path name, and the first argument
        pointer) are type checked.



1.3  File Names and Path Names

Many library routines take strings representing paths and file names as
arguments. If you plan to transport your programs to the XENIX operating
system, you should remember that XENIX uses file- and path-name conventions
that are different from those used by DOS and OS/2. If you do not plan to
transport your programs to XENIX, you can skip this section.


Case Sensitivity

The DOS and OS/2 operating systems are not case sensitive (they do not
distinguish between uppercase and lowercase letters). Thus, SAMPLE.C and
Sample.C refer to the same file in DOS and OS/2. However, the XENIX
operating system is case sensitive. In XENIX, SAMPLE.C and Sample.C refer to
different files. To transport programs to XENIX, choose file and path names
that work correctly in XENIX, since either case works in DOS and OS/2. For
instance, the following directives are identical in DOS and OS/2, but only
the second works in XENIX:

    #include <STDIO.H>
    #include <stdio.h>


Subdirectory Conventions

Under XENIX, certain header files are normally placed in a subdirectory
named SYS. Microsoft C follows this convention to ease the process of
transporting programs to XENIX. If you do not plan to transport your
programs, you can place the SYS header files elsewhere.


Path-Name Delimiters

XENIX uses the slash (/) in path names, while DOS and OS/2 use the backslash
(\). To transport programs to XENIX, it is advantageous to use path-name
delimiters that are compatible with XENIX whenever possible.


1.4  Choosing Between Functions and Macros

This book uses the words "routine" and "function" interchangeably. However,
the term "routine" actually encompasses both functions and macros. Because
functions and macros have different properties, you should pay attention to
which form you are using. The descriptions in the reference section indicate
whether routines are implemented as functions or as macros.

Most routines in the Microsoft C library are functions. They consist of
compiled C code or assembled Microsoft Macro Assembler (MASM) code. However,
a few library routines are implemented as macros that behave like functions.
You can pass arguments to library macros and invoke them in the same way you
invoke functions.

The main benefit of using macros is faster execution time. A macro is
expanded (replaced by its definition) during preprocessing, creating in-line
code. Thus, macros do not have the overhead associated with function calls.
On the other hand, each use of a macro inserts the same code in your
program, whereas a function definition occurs only once regardless of how
many times it is called. Functions and macros thus offer a trade-off between
speed and size.

Apart from speed and size issues, macros and functions have some other
important differences:


    ■   Some macros treat arguments with side effects incorrectly when the
        macro evaluates its arguments more than once (see the example that
        follows this list). Not every macro has this effect. To determine if a
        macro handles side effects as desired, examine its definition in the
        appropriate header file.

    ■   A function name evaluates to an address, but a macro name does not.
        Thus, you cannot use a macro name in contexts requiring a function
        pointer. For instance, you can declare a pointer to a function, but
        you cannot declare a pointer to a macro.

    ■   You can declare functions, but you cannot declare macros. Thus, the
        compiler cannot perform type checking of macro arguments as it does of
        function arguments. However, the compiler can detect when you pass the
        wrong number of arguments to a macro.

    ■   You must always include the appropriate header file when using a
        library macro. Every library macro is defined with a #define directive
        in a header file. If you do not include the header file, the macro is
        undefined.


The following example demonstrates how some macros can produce unwanted side
effects. It uses the toupper routine from the standard C library.

    #include <ctype.h>

    int a = 'm';
    a = toupper(a++);

The example increments  a  when passing it as an argument to the toupper
routine, which is implemented as a macro. It is defined in CTYPE.H:

    #define toupper(c)  ( (islower(c)) ? _toupper(c) : (c) )

The definition uses the conditional operator (? :). The conditional
expression evaluates the argument  c  twice: once to check if it is
lowercase and again to create the result. This macro evaluates the argument
a++  twice, increasing  a  by 2 instead of 1. As a result, the value
operated on by islower differs from the value operated on by _toupper.

Like some other library routines, toupper is provided in both macro and
function versions. The header file CTYPE.H not only declares the toupper
function but also defines the toupper macro.

Choosing between the macro version and function version of such routines is
easy. If you wish to use the macro version, you can simply include the
header file that contains the macro definition. Because the macro definition
of the routine always appears after the function declaration, the macro
definition normally takes precedence. Thus, if your program includes CTYPE.H
and then calls toupper, the compiler uses the toupper macro:

    #include <ctype.h>

    int a = 'm';
    a = toupper(a);

You can force the compiler to use the function version of a routine by
enclosing the routine's name in parentheses:

    #include <ctype.h>

    int a = 'm';
    a = (toupper) (a);

Because the name toupper is not immediately followed by a left parenthesis,
the compiler cannot interpret it as a macro name. It must use the toupper
function.

A second way to do this is to "undefine" the macro definition with the
#undef directive:

    #include <ctype.h>
    #undef toupper

Since the macro definition no longer exists, subsequent references to
toupper use the function version.

A third way to make sure the compiler uses the function version is to
declare the function explicitly:

    #include <ctype.h>
    int toupper(int _c);

Since this function declaration appears after the macro definition in
CTYPE.H, it causes the compiler to use the toupper function.


1.5  Stack Checking on Entry

For certain library routines, the compiler performs stack checking on entry.
(The "stack" is a memory area used for temporary storage.) Upon entry to
such a routine, the stack is checked to determine if it has enough room for
the local variables used by that routine. If it does, space is allocated by
adjusting the stack pointer. Otherwise, a "stack overflow" run-time error
occurs. If stack checking is disabled, the compiler assumes there is enough
stack space; if there is not, you might overwrite memory locations in the
data segment and receive no warning.

Typically, stack checking is enabled only for functions with large
local-variable requirements (more than about 150 bytes), since there is
enough free space between the stack and data segments to handle functions
with smaller requirements. If the function is called many times, stack
checking slows execution slightly.

Stack checking is enabled for the following library functions:

execvp          printf          spawnvpe        system
execvpe         scanf           sprintf         vprintf
fprintf         spawnvp         sscanf          write
fscanf

1.6  Handling Errors

Many library routines return a value that indicates an error condition. To
avoid unexpected results, your code should always check such error values
and handle all of the possible error conditions. The description of each
library routine in the reference section lists the routine's return
value(s).

Some library functions do not have a set error return. These include
functions that return nothing and functions whose range of return values
makes it impossible to return a unique error value. To aid in error
handling, some functions in this category set the value of a global variable
named errno.

If the reference description of a routine states that it sets the errno
variable, you can use errno in two ways:


    1.  Compare errno to the values defined in the header file ERRNO.H.

    2.  Handle errno with the perror or strerror library routines. The perror
        routine prints a system error message to the standard error (stderr).
        The strerror routine stores the same information in a string for later
        use.


When you use errno, perror, and strerror, remember that the value of errno
reflects the error value for the last call that set errno. To avoid
confusion, you should always test the return value to verify that an error
actually occurred. Once you determine that an error has occurred, use errno
or perror immediately. Otherwise, the value of errno may be changed by
intervening calls.

Library math routines set errno by calling the matherr or _matherrl library
routines, which are described in the reference section. If you wish to
handle math errors differently from these routines, you can write your own
routine and name it matherr or _matherrl. Your routine must follow the rules
listed in the matherr reference description.

The ferror library routine allows you to check for errors in stream
input/output operations. This routine checks if an error indicator has been
set for a given stream. Closing or rewinding the stream automatically clears
the error indicator. You can also reset the error indicator by calling the
clearerr library routine.

The feof library routine tests for end-of-file on a given stream. An
end-of-file condition in low-level input and output can be detected with the
eof routine or when a read operation returns 0 as the number of bytes read.


The _grstatus library routine allows you to check for errors after calling
certain graphics library operations. See the reference page on the _grstatus
function for details.


1.7  Operating-System Considerations

The library routines listed in this section behave differently under
different operating system versions. For more information on an individual
routine, see the description of that routine in the reference section.

Routine                           Restrictions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
locking                           These routines are effective only in
sopen                             OS/2 and in DOS versions 3.0 and later.
_fsopen

dosexterr                         The dosexterr routine provides error
                                    handling for system call 0x59 (get
                                    extended error) in DOS versions 3.0 and
                                    later.

dup                               The dup and dup2 routines can cause
dup2                              unexpected results in DOS versions
                                    earlier than 3.0. If you use dup or dup2
                                    to create a duplicate file handle for
                                    stdin, stdout, stderr, stdaux, or stdprn
                                    , calling the close function with one
                                    handle causes errors in later I/O
                                    operations that use the other handle.
                                    This anomaly does not occur in OS/2 or
                                    in DOS versions 3.0 and later.

exec                              When using the exec and spawn families
spawn                             of functions under DOS versions earlier
                                    than 3.0, the value of the arg0 argument
                                    (or argv[0] to the child process) is not
                                    available to the user; a null string (""
                                    ) is stored in that position instead. In
                                    OS/2, the arg0 argument contains the
                                    command name; in DOS versions 3.0 and
                                    later, it contains the complete command
                                    path.

Microsoft C defines global variables that indicate the version of the
current operating system. You can use these to determine the
operating-system version in which a program is executing. See Chapter 3,
"Global Variables and Standard Types," for more information.


1.8  Floating-Point Support

Microsoft math library routines require floating-point support to perform
calculations with real numbers (numbers that can contain fractions). This
support can be provided by the floating-point libraries that accompany your
compiler software or by an 8087, 80287, or 80387 coprocessor. The names of
the functions that require floating-point support are listed below:

acos            cos             fmod            modfl
acosl           cosl            fmodl           pow
asin            cosh            fmsbintoieee    powl
asinl           coshl           _fpreset        sin
atan            dieeetomsbin    frexp           sinl
atanl           difftime        frexpl          sinh
atan2           dmsbintoieee    gcvt            sinhl
atan2l          ecvt            hypot           sqrt
atof            exp             hypotl          sqrtl
_atold          expl            ldexp           _status87
bessel          fabs            ldexpl          strtod
cabs            fabsl           log             _strtold
cabsl           fcvt            logl            tan
ceil            fieeetomsbin    log10           tanl
ceill           floor           log10l          tanh
_clear87        floorl          modf            tanhl
_control87

Note that the bessel routine does not correspond to a single function, but
to twelve functions named j0, j1, jn, y0, y1, yn, _j0l, _j1l, _jnl, _y0l,
_y1l, and _ynl. Also note that the _clear87 and _control87 functions are not
available with the /FPa compiler option.

Also requiring floating-point support is the printf family of functions
(cprintf, fprintf, printf, sprintf, vfprintf, vprintf, and vsprintf). These
functions require support for floating-point input and output if used to
print floating-point values.

The C compiler tries to detect whether floating-point values are used in a
program so that supporting functions are loaded only if required. This
behavior saves a considerable amount of space for programs that do not
require floating-point support.

When you use a floating-point type specifier in the format string for a
printf or scanf call, make sure you specify floating-point values or
pointers to floating-point values in the argument list. These must
correspond to any floating-point

type specifiers in the format string. The presence of floating-point
arguments allows the compiler to detect that floating-point support code is
required. If a floating-point type specifier is used to print an integer
argument, for example, floating-point values will not be detected because
the compiler does not actually read the format string used in the printf and
scanf functions. For instance, the following program produces an error at
run time:

    main( ) /* This example causes an error */
    {
    long f = 10L;
    printf("%f", f);
    }

In the preceding example, the functions for floating-point support are not
loaded because


    ■   No floating-point arguments are given in the call to printf.

    ■   No floating-point values are used elsewhere in the program.


As a result, the following error occurs:

    Floating point not loaded

Here is a corrected version of the above call to printf in which the long
integer value is cast to double:

    main( ) /* This example works correctly */
    {
    long f = 10L;
    printf("%f", (double) f);
    }


1.9  Using Huge Arrays with Library Functions

In programs that use small, compact, medium, and large memory models,
Microsoft C allows you to use arrays exceeding the 64K (kilobyte) limit of
physical memory in these models by explicitly declaring the arrays as _huge.
However, generally, you cannot pass _huge data items as arguments to C
library functions. In the compact-model library used by compact-model
programs and in the large-model library used by both large-model and
huge-model programs, only the functions listed below use argument arithmetic
that works with _huge items:

bsearch         _fmemcmp        _fmemset        lsearch
fread           _fmemcpy        halloc          memccpy
fwrite          _fmemicmp       hfree           memchr
_fmemccpy       _fmemmove       lfind
_fmemchr

With this set of functions, you can read from, write to, search, sort, copy,
initialize, compare, or dynamically allocate and free _huge arrays; the
_huge array can be passed without difficulty to any of these functions in a
compact-, large-, or huge-model program. The model-independent routines in
the above list (those beginning with _f) are available in all memory models.


The memset, memcpy, and memcmplibrary routines are available in two
versions: as C functions and as intrinsic (in-line) code. The function
versions of these routines support huge pointers in compact and large memory
models, but the intrinsic versions do not support huge pointers. (The
function version of such routines generates a call to a library function,
whereas the intrinsic version inserts in-line code into your program. Your
compiler documentation explains how to select the intrinsic versions of
library routines.)




Chapter 2  Run-Time Routines by Category
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Microsoft C library routines handle various kinds of tasks. If you know the
type of task you need done, but don't know exactly which routine to use, the
categorized lists of routines in this chapter can help.

The descriptions here are intended only to give you a brief overview of the
capabilities of the run-time library. For a complete description of the
behavior, syntax, and use of each routine, see Part 2, "Run-Time Functions."


The main categories of library routines are


    ■   Buffer manipulation

    ■   Character classification and conversion

    ■   Data conversion

    ■   Directory control

    ■   File handling

    ■   Graphics

    ■   Input and output

    ■   Internationalization

    ■   Math

    ■   Memory allocation

    ■   Process and environment control

    ■   Searching and sorting

    ■   String manipulation

    ■   System calls

    ■   Time

    ■   Variable-length argument lists



2.1  Buffer Manipulation

The buffer-manipulation routines are useful for working with areas of memory
on a character-by-character basis. A "buffer" is an array of characters,
similar to a character string. However, unlike strings, buffers are not
usually terminated with a null character ('\0'). Therefore, the
buffer-manipulation routines always take a length or count argument.
Function declarations for the buffermanipulation routines are given in the
include files MEMORY.H and STRING.H, with an exception being the swab
function, which appears in STDLIB.H.

Routines beginning with _f  are model independent; the _f  stands for far.
These routines are useful in writing mixed-model programs because they can
be called from any program, regardless of the memory model being used.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
memccpy,  _fmemccpy               Copy characters from one buffer to
                                    another until a given character or a
                                    given number of characters has been
                                    copied

memchr,  _fmemchr                 Return a pointer to the first
                                    occurrence, within a specified number of
                                    characters, of a given character in the
                                    buffer

memcmp,  _fmemcmp                 Compare a specified number of characters
                                    from two buffers

memcpy,  _fmemcpy                 Copy a specified number of characters
                                    from one buffer to another

memicmp, _fmemicmp                Compare a specified number of characters
                                    from two buffers without regard to the
                                    case of the letters (uppercase and
                                    lowercase treated as equivalent)

memmove,                          Copy a specified number of characters
_fmemmove                         from one buffer to another

memset,  _fmemset                 Use a given character to initialize a
                                    specified number of bytes in the buffer


swab                              Swaps bytes of data and stores them at
                                    the specified location

When the source and target areas overlap, only the memmove and _fmemmove
functions are guaranteed to copy the full source properly. (The memcpy and
_fmemcpy routines do not always copy the full source in such cases.)


2.2  Character Classification and Conversion

The character classification and conversion routines allow you to test
individual characters in a variety of ways and to convert between uppercase
and lowercase characters.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
isalnum                           Tests for alphanumeric character

isalpha                           Tests for alphabetic character

isascii                           Tests for ASCII character

iscntrl                           Tests for control character

isdigit                           Tests for decimal digit

isgraph                           Tests for printable character except
                                    space

islower                           Tests for lowercase character

isprint                           Tests for printable character

ispunct                           Tests for punctuation character

isspace                           Tests for white-space character

isupper                           Tests for uppercase character

isxdigit                          Tests for hexadecimal digit

toascii                           Converts character to ASCII code

tolower                           Tests character and converts to
                                    lowercase if uppercase

_tolower                          Converts character to lowercase
                                    (unconditional)

toupper                           Tests character and converts to
                                    uppercase if
                                    lowercase

_toupper                          Converts character to uppercase
                                    (unconditional)

The classification routines identify characters by finding them in a table
of classification codes. Using these routines to classify characters is
generally faster than writing a test expression such as the following:

    if ((c >= 0) || c <= 0x7f))

All of these routines are implemented in two versions: as functions and as
macros. The function prototypes and macro definitions appear in CTYPE.H.
Section 1.4, "Choosing Between Functions and Macros," explains how to choose
the appropriate version. The toupper and tolower functions are also declared
in the STDLIB.H header file.


2.3  Data Conversion

The data-conversion routines convert numbers to strings of ASCII characters
and vice versa. These routines are implemented as functions, all of which
are declared in the include file STDLIB.H. The atof function, which converts
a string to a floating-point value, is also declared in MATH.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
abs                               Finds absolute value of integer

atof                              Converts string to float

atoi                              Converts string to int

atol                              Converts string to long

_atold                            Converts string to long double

ecvt                              Converts double to string

fcvt                              Converts double to string

gcvt                              Converts double to string

itoa                              Converts int to string

labs                              Finds absolute value of long integer

ltoa                              Converts long to string

strtod                            Converts string to double

strtol                            Converts string to a long integer

_strtold                          Converts string to long double

strtoul                           Converts string to an unsigned long
                                    integer

ultoa                             Converts unsigned long to string


2.4  Directory Control

The directory-control routines let a program access, modify, and obtain
information about the directory structure. These routines are functions and
are declared in DIRECT.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
chdir                             Changes current working directory

_chdrive                          Changes current drive

getcwd                            Gets current working directory

_getdcwd                          Gets current working directory for the
                                    specified drive

_getdrive                         Gets the current disk drive

mkdir                             Makes a new directory

rmdir                             Removes a directory

_searchenv                        Searches for a given file on specified
                                    paths


2.5  File Handling

The file-handling routines let you create, manipulate, and delete files.
They also set and check file-access permissions.

File-handling routines work on a file designated by a path name or by a
"file handle," an integer assigned by the operating system that identifies
an open file. These routines modify or give information about the designated
file. Most of them are declared in the include file IO.H, with the
exceptions being the fstat and stat functions (declared in SYS\STAT.H), the
_fullpath routine (declared in DIRECT.H), and the remove and rename
functions (also declared in STDIO.H).

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
access                            Checks file-permission setting

chmod                             Changes file-permission setting

chsize                            Changes file size

filelength                        Gets file length

fstat                             Gets file-status information on handle

_fullpath                         Makes an absolute path name from a
                                    relative path name

isatty                            Checks for character device

locking                           Locks areas of file (available with OS/2
                                    and
                                    DOS versions 3.0 and later)

_makepath                         Merges path-name components into a
                                    single, full path name

mktemp                            Creates unique file name

remove                            Deletes file

rename                            Renames file

setmode                           Sets file-translation mode

_splitpath                        Splits a path name into component pieces

stat                              Gets file-status information on named
                                    file

umask                             Sets default-permission mask

unlink                            Deletes file

The access, chmod, _fullpath, _makepath, remove, rename, _splitpath, stat,
and unlink routines operate on files specified by a path name or file name.


The chsize, filelength, fstat, isatty, locking, and setmode routines work
with files designated by a file handle.

The mktemp and umask routines have functions that are slightly different
from the other routines. The mktemp routine creates a unique file name, and
the programmer can use mktemp to create unique file names that do not
conflict with the names of existing files. The umask routine sets the
default permission mask for any new files created in a program. The mask can
override the permission setting given in the open or creat call for the new
file.


2.6  Graphics

Microsoft C graphics routines offer a wide variety of graphics functions,
low-level graphics primitives, font functions, and presentation graphics
(displays such as graphs and pie charts).

Graphics functions are supplied in two libraries that must be explicitly
linked with your program. The GRAPHICS.LIB library provides support for
low-level graphics and character-font routines. The library PGCHART.LIB
supports presentation-graphics routines.


2.6.1  Low-Level Graphics and Character-Font Functions

The low-level graphics and font functions are declared in the include file
GRAPH.H.

The library can be divided into the eight categories listed below, which
correspond to the different tasks involved in creating and manipulating
graphic objects.

Most graphics routines work only in DOS. Two categories of routines
("configuring mode and environment" and "creating text output") work in OS/2
as well as DOS.

Category                          Task
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
Configuring mode and environment  Select the proper display mode for the
(OS/2 and DOS)                    hardware and establish memory areas for
                                    writing and displaying of images

Setting coordinates               Specify the logical origin and the
                                    active display area within the screen

Setting low-level graphics        Specify a palette mapping for low-level
palettes                          graphics routines

Setting attributes                Specify background and foreground
                                    colors, fill masks, and line styles for
                                    low-level graphics routines

Creating graphics                 Draw and fill figures
output

Creating text output (OS/2 and    Write text on the screen
DOS)

Transferring images               Store images in memory and retrieve them

Displaying fonts                  Display text in character fonts
                                    compatible with Microsoft Windows(tm)

The following sections explain each of these categories.


2.6.1.1  Configuring Mode and Environment

Routines that configure the mode and environment establish the graphics or
text mode of operation, determine the current graphics environment, and
control the display of the cursor.

All of the routines listed in this section are available in OS/2 as well as
DOS.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_clearscreen                      Erases the screen and fills it with the
                                    current background color

_getactivepage                    Gets the current active page number

_getbkcolor                       Returns the current background color

_getvideoconfig                   Obtains status of current graphics
                                    environment

_getvisualpage                    Gets the current visual page number

_grstatus                         Returns the status of the most recent
                                    graphics function call

_setactivepage                    Sets memory area for the active page for
                                    writing
                                    images

_setbkcolor                       Sets the current background color

_settextrows                      Sets the number of text rows

_setvideomode                     Selects an operating mode for the
                                    display screen

_setvideomoderows                 Sets the video mode and the number of
                                    rows for text operations

_setvisualpage                    Sets memory area for the current visual
                                    page


2.6.1.2  Setting Coordinates

The "set coordinates" routines set the current text or graphics position and
convert pixel coordinates between the various graphic coordinate systems.

The Microsoft C graphics functions recognize three sets of coordinates:


    1.  Fixed physical coordinates

    2.  View coordinates defined by the application

    3.  Window coordinates that can include floating-point values


The functions in this category establish window and view coordinate systems
and translate between physical, view, and window coordinate systems.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_getcurrentposition               Determines current position in view
                                    coordinates

_getcurrentposition_w             Determines current position in window
                                    coordinates

_getphyscoord                     Converts view coordinates to physical
                                    coordinates

_getviewcoord                     Converts physical coordinates to view
                                    coordinates

_getviewcoord_w                   Converts window coordinates to view
                                    coordinates

_getviewcoord_wxy                 Converts window coordinates in _wxycoord
                                    structure to view coordinates

_getwindowcoord                   Converts view coordinates to window
                                    coordinates

_setcliprgn                       Limits graphic output to a region of the
                                    screen

_setvieworg                       Positions the view-coordinate origin

_setviewport                      Limits graphics output to a region of
                                    the screen and positions the
                                    view-coordinate origin to the upper-left
                                    corner of that region

_setwindow                        Defines a floating-point window
                                    coordinate system

The default view coordinate system is identical to the physical screen
coordinate system. The physical origin (0, 0) is always in the upper-left
corner of the display. The x axis extends in the positive direction left to
right, while the y axis extends in the positive direction top to bottom.

The physical horizontal and vertical dimensions depend on the hardware
display configuration and the selected mode. These values are accessible at
run time by examining the numxpixels and numypixels fields of the
videoconfig structure returned by _getvideoconfig. (The _getvideoconfig
routine is listed in the previous section.)

The _setvieworg function allows you to move the viewport origin to a new
position relative to the physical screen.

Routines that refer to coordinates on the physical screen or viewport
require integer values. However, in real-world graphing applications, you
might wish to use floating-point values, such as stock prices or average
rainfall. The window coordinate system allows you to display graphics using
floating-point values instead of integers.

The _getcurrentposition and _getcurrentposition_w routines allow you to
determine the location of the current graphics-output point.

The _setcliprgn function defines a restricted active display area on the
screen. The _setviewport function does the same thing and also resets the
viewport origin to the upper-left corner of the restricted active display
area.

The physical coordinates of any view-coordinate point can be determined with
the _getphyscoord function, and the view coordinates of any physical point
can be determined with the _getviewcoord function.

The view coordinates of any window coordinate can be determined with the
_getviewcoord_w and _getviewcoord_wxy functions. The window coordinates of
any view coordinate can be determined with the _getwindowcoord function.

The _setwindow function defines the current viewport as a real-coordinate
window bound by the specified floating-point values.


2.6.1.3  Setting Low-Level Graphics Palettes

Use the low-level palette routines to select or remap color palettes.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_remapallpalette                  Changes all color indexes in the current
                                    palette

_remappalette                     Changes a single color index in the
                                    current palette

_selectpalette                    Selects a predefined palette

Some video modes support a "color palette," which is a table of the color
values that can be displayed together on the screen at any given time. A
"color value" is a long integer representing a color that can be displayed
on your system.

In CGA color graphics modes, you can use the _selectpalette routine to
choose one of several predefined palettes.

On EGA and VGA video systems, you can "remap" (change) the palette using the
_remappalette or _remapallpalette routines. For instance, the EGA _ERESCOLOR
mode offers a total of 64 color values, of which 16 can be displayed at a
time. In this mode, the palette contains 16 "color indices," or slots to
which you can assign color values.

The _remappalette routine changes a single color index to a specified color
value. The _remapallpalette routine changes all of the available palette
entries simultaneously.


2.6.1.4  Setting Attributes

The low-level output functions that draw lines, arcs, ellipses, and other
basic figures do not specify color or line-style information. Instead, the
low-level graphics functions rely on a set of attributes that are set
independently by the following functions:

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_getarcinfo                       Determines the endpoints in viewport
                                    coordinates of the most recently drawn
                                    arc or pie

_getcolor                         Gets the current color

_getfillmask                      Gets the current fill mask

_getlinestyle                     Gets the current line-style mask

_getwritemode                     Gets the current logical write mode

_setcolor                         Sets the current color

_setfillmask                      Sets the current fill mask

_setlinestyle                     Sets the current line-style mask

_setwritemode                     Sets logical write mode for line drawing

The _getcolor and _setcolor functions get or set the current color index for
graphics and font output. The _getbkcolor and _setbkcolor functions get or
set the current background color.

The _getfillmask and _setfillmask functions get or set the current fill
mask. The mask is an 8-by-8-bit template array, with each bit representing a
pixel. If a bit is 0, the pixel in memory is left untouched, as the mask is
transparent to that pixel. If a bit is 1, the pixel is assigned the current
color value. The template is repeated as necessary over the entire fill
area.

The _getlinestyle and _setlinestyle functions get or set the current line
style. The line style is determined by a 16-bit template buffer with each
bit corresponding to a pixel. If a bit is 1, the pixel is set to the current
color. If a bit is 0, the pixel is not changed. The template is repeated for
the length of the line.

The _getwritemode and _setwritemode functions get or set the logical write
mode for straight line drawing. The default mode, _GPSET, causes lines to be
drawn in the current graphics color. Other modes combine the current
graphics color and the original screen image using various logical
operations.


2.6.1.5  Creating Graphics Output

The graphics output functions use a set of specified coordinates and draw
various figures. They use the current or default attributes for line-style
mask, fill mask, write mode, background color, and foreground color.

The name of each function announces its task or the figure it draws, as the
following list indicates:

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_arc,  _arc_w,  _arc_wxy          Draw an arc

_ellipse,  _ellipse_w,            Draw an ellipse or circle
_ellipse_wxy

_floodfill,  _floodfill_w         Flood-fill an area of the screen with
                                    the current color

_getcurrentposition,              Obtain the current graphic-output
_getcurrentposition_w             position used by _lineto and _outgtext

_getpixel, _getpixel_w            Obtain a pixel's color

_lineto,  _lineto_w               Draw a line from the current graphic
                                    output position to a specified point

_moveto,  _moveto_w               Move the current graphic-output position
                                    to a specified point

_pie,  _pie_w,  _pie_wxy          Draw a pie-slice-shaped figure

_polygon,  _polygon_w,            Draw or scan-fill a polygon
_polygon_wxy

_rectangle,  _rectangle_w,        Draw or scan-fill a rectangle
_rectangle_wxy

_setpixel,  _setpixel_w           Set a pixel's color

Most of these routines are available in several forms, which are indicated
by their names. Output functions without a suffix use the view coordinate
system. Functions that end with _w take double values as arguments and use
the window coordinate system. Functions that end with _wxy use _wxycoord
structures to define the coordinates and use the window coordinate system.

Circular figures, such as arcs and ellipses, are centered within a "bounding
rectangle" specified by two points that define the diagonally opposed
corners of the rectangle. The center of the rectangle becomes the center of
the figure, and the rectangle's borders determine the size of the figure.


2.6.1.6  Creating Text Output

The next group of routines provides text output in both graphics and text
modes. Unlike the standard console I/O library routines, these functions
recognize text-window boundaries and use the current text color.

All of the routines listed in this section work in OS/2 as well as DOS.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_displaycursor                    Sets the cursor on or off upon exit from
                                    a graphics routine

_gettextcolor                     Obtains the current text color

_gettextcursor                    Returns the current cursor attribute
                                    (text modes only)

_gettextposition                  Obtains the current text-output position

_gettextwindow                    Gets the current text window boundaries

_outmem                           Prints text of a specified length from a
                                    memory
                                    buffer

_outtext                          Outputs a text string to the screen at
                                    the current text position

_scrolltextwindow                 Scrolls the current text window up or
                                    down

_settextcolor                     Sets the current text color

_settextcursor                    Sets the current cursor attribute (text
                                    modes only)

_settextposition                  Relocates the current text position

_settextwindow                    Defines the current text-display window

_wrapon                           Enables or disables line wrap

The _outtext and _outmem routines provide no formatting. If you want to
output integer or floating-point values, you must convert the values into a
string variable (using the sprintf function) before calling these routines.


The _outtext routine recognizes the \n (newline character) and \r (carriage
return) sequences. The _outmem routine treats these sequences as printable
graphics characters.


2.6.1.7  Transferring Images

The functions in this category transfer screen images between memory and the
display, using a buffer allocated by the application, or determine the size
in bytes of the buffer needed to store a given image.

The functions that end with _w or _wxy use window coordinates; the other
functions in this set use view coordinates.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_getimage,                        Store a screen image in memory
_getimage_w,
_getimage_wxy

_imagesize,                       Return the size (in bytes) of the buffer
_imagesize_w,                     needed to store the image
_imagesize_wxy

_putimage,                        Retrieve an image from memory and
_putimage_w                       display it

In some cases, the buffer needed to store an image with the _getimage
functions must be larger than 64K (65,535) bytes. Use the halloc routine to
allocate a buffer larger than 64K.


2.6.1.8  Displaying Fonts

The functions listed in this section control the display of font-based
characters on the screen.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_getfontinfo                      Obtains the current font characteristics

_getgtextextent                   Determines the width in pixels of
                                    specified text in the current font

_getgtextvector                   Gets orientation of font text output

_outgtext                         Outputs text in the current font to the
                                    screen at the specified pixel position

_registerfonts                    Initializes font library

_setfont                          Finds a single font that matches a
                                    specified set of characteristics and
                                    makes this font the current font for use
                                    by the _outgtext function

_setgtextvector                   Sets the current orientation for font
                                    text output

_unregisterfonts                  Frees memory allocated by _registerfonts


2.6.2  Presentation-Graphics Functions

The presentation-graphics functions are declared in the PGCHART.H include
file. The library can be divided into the three categories listed below,
corresponding to the different tasks involved in creating and manipulating
graphic objects:

Category                          Task
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
Displaying presentation graphics  Initialize video structures for
                                    presentation graphics and establishes
                                    the default chart type. Display
                                    presentation-graphics chart: bar,
                                    column, pie, scatter, or line chart.

Analyzing                         Analyze data (does not display chart).
presentation-graphics data

Manipulating                      Modify basic chart structures (e.g.,
presentation-graphics structures  palettes, cross-hatching styles).


2.6.2.1  Displaying Presentation Graphics

The functions listed in this section initialize the presentation-graphics
library and display the specified graph type.

Because the _pg_initchart routine initializes the presentation-graphics
library, it must be called before any other function in the
presentation-graphics library. The _pg_defaultchart function initializes the
variables in the chart environment.

The other routines in this category display the specified graph. The
single-series versions plot one set of data, and the multiseries versions
(those ending with an ms suffix) plot several sets of data in the same chart
style.

Presentation-graphics programs can display text in different font sizes by
taking advantage of font-based characters (see Section 2.6.1.8, "Displaying
Fonts.") Call the _registerfonts and _setfont routines to select a font
before calling the _pginitchart routine. Subsequent charts use the selected
font. You can later call the _unregisterfonts routine to restore the default
character font and free the memory previously allocated for fonts.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_pg_chart                         Displays a single-series bar, column, or
                                    line chart

_pg_chartms                       Displays a multiseries bar, column, or
                                    line chart

_pg_chartpie                      Displays a pie chart

_pg_chartscatter                  Displays a scatter diagram for a single
                                    series of data

_pg_chartscatterms                Displays a scatter diagram for more than
                                    one series of data

_pg_defaultchart                  Initializes all necessary variables in
                                    the chart environment for a specified
                                    chart type

_pg_initchart                     Initializes the presentation-graphics
                                    library


2.6.2.2  Analyzing Presentation-Graphics Charts

These routines calculate default values for the specified graph type but do
not display the chart. The single-series versions analyze one set of data,
and the multiseries versions analyze several sets of data in the same chart
style.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_pg_analyzechart                  Analyzes a single series of data for a
                                    bar, column, or line chart

_pg_analyzechartms                Analyzes a multiseries of data for a
                                    bar, column, or line chart

_pg_analyzepie                    Analyzes data for a pie chart

_pg_analyzescatter                Analyzes a single series of data for a
                                    scatter diagram

_pg_analyzescatterms              Analyzes a multiseries of data for a
                                    scatter diagram


2.6.2.3  Manipulating Presentation-Graphics Structures

These functions control low-level aspects of the presentation-graphics
package.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_pg_hlabelchart                   Writes text horizontally on the screen

_pg_vlabelchart                   Writes text vertically on the screen

_pg_getpalette                    Retrieves current colors, line styles,
                                    fill patterns, and plot characters for
                                    all presentation-graphics palettes

_pg_setpalette                    Sets current colors, line styles, fill
                                    patterns, and plot characters for all
                                    presentation-graphics palettes

_pg_resetpalette                  Sets current colors, line styles, fill
                                    patterns, and plot characters to the
                                    default values for the current screen
                                    mode

_pg_getstyleset                   Retrieves the contents of the current
                                    styleset

_pg_setstyleset                   Sets the contents of the current
                                    styleset

_pg_resetstyleset                 Resets the contents of the current
                                    styleset to the default value for the
                                    current screen mode

_pg_getchardef                    Retrieves the current 8-by-8-pixel bit
                                    map for a specified character

_pg_setchardef                    Sets the 8-by-8-pixel bit map for a
                                    specified
                                    character


2.7  Input and Output

The input and output (I/O) routines of the standard C library allow you to
read and write data to and from files and devices. In C, there are no
predefined file structures; all data items are treated as sequences of
bytes. The following three types of I/O functions are available:


    1.  Stream

    2.  Low-level

    3.  Console and port


The "stream" I/O functions treat data as a stream of individual characters.
By choosing among the many stream functions available, you can process data
in different sizes and formats, from single characters to large data
structures. Stream I/O also provides buffering, which can significantly
improve performance.

The "low-level" I/O routines do not perform buffering and formatting.
Instead, they invoke the operating system's input and output capabilities
directly. These routines let you access files and peripheral devices at a
more basic level than the stream functions.

The "console and port" I/O routines allow you to read or write directly to a
console (keyboard and screen) or an I/O port (such as a printer port). The
port I/O routines simply read and write data in bytes. With console I/O
routines, some additional options are available, such as detecting whether a
character has been typed at the console. You can also choose between echoing
characters to the screen as they are read or reading characters without
echoing.

The C library also provides a number of direct DOS I/O system call routines.
These are described in Section 2.14, "System Calls."

File I/O operations can be performed in two modes: text or binary. The
following section describes these modes and their use.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
WARNING

Because stream routines are buffered and low-level routines are not, the two
types of routines are generally incompatible. You should use either stream
or low-level routines consistently for processing a given file.
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


2.7.1  Text and Binary Modes

Many C programs use data files for input and output. Under DOS and OS/2,
data files are normally processed in text mode. In this mode, each
carriage-return-line-feed (CR-LF) combination is translated into a single
line-feed character during input. During output, each line-feed character is
translated into a CR-LF combination.

Sometimes you may want to process a file without making those translations.
In these cases you use binary mode, which suppresses CR-LF translations.

You can control the file translation mode in the following ways:


    ■   To process a few selected files in binary mode, while retaining the
        default text mode for most files, you can specify binary mode when you
        open the selected files. The fopen routine opens a file in binary mode
        when you specify the letter b in the access-mode string for the file.
        The open routine opens a file in binary mode when you specify the
        O_BINARY flag in the oflag argument. For more information about fopen
        and open, see the reference description of each routine.

    ■   To process most or all files in binary mode, you can change the
        default mode to binary. The global variable _fmode controls the
        default translation mode, which is normally text. If you set _fmode to
        O_BINARY, the default mode is binary except for stdaux and stdprn,
        which are opened in binary mode by default.


You can change the value of _fmode in two ways:


    1.  Link with the file BINMODE.OBJ (supplied with Microsoft C). This
        changes the initial setting of _fmode to the O_BINARY flag, causing
        all files except stdin, stdout, and stderr to be opened in binary
        mode.

    2.  Change the value of _fmode directly by setting it to the O_BINARY flag
        in your program. This has the same effect as linking with BINMODE.OBJ.


You can still override the default mode (now binary) for a particular file
by opening it in text mode. Specify the letter t when using fopen, or
specify the O_TEXT flag when using open.

By default, the stdin, stdout, and stderr files are opened in text mode, and
the stdaux and stdprn files are opened in binary mode. The setmode routine
allows you to change these defaults or change the mode of a file after it
has been opened. See the reference description of setmode for details.


2.7.2  Stream Routines

Stream I/O functions handle data as a continuous stream of characters. To
use the stream functions, you must include the file STDIO.H in your program.
This file defines constants, types, and structures used in the stream
functions, and contains function declarations and macro definitions for the
stream  routines.

When a file is opened for I/O using the stream functions, the opened file is
associated with a structure of type FILE (defined in STDIO.H) containing
basic information about the file. A pointer to the FILE structure is
returned when the stream is opened. Subsequent operations use this pointer
(also called the "stream pointer," or just "stream") to refer to the file.

The stream functions provide for buffered, formatted, or unformatted input
and output. When a stream is buffered, data that is read from or written to
the stream is collected in an intermediate storage location called a
"buffer". In write operations, the output buffer's contents are written to
the appropriate final location when the buffer is full, the stream is
closed, or the program terminates normally. The buffer is said to be
"flushed" when this occurs. In read operations, a block of data is placed in
the input buffer read from the buffer; when the input buffer is empty, the
next block of data is transferred into the buffer.

Buffering produces efficient I/O because the system can transfer a large
block of data in a single operation rather than performing an I/O operation
each time a data item is read from or written to a stream. However, if a
program terminates abnormally, output buffers may not be flushed, resulting
in loss of data.

Some of the constants defined in STDIO.H may be useful in your program. The
manifest constant EOF is defined to be the value returned at end-of-file.
NULL is the null pointer. FILE is the structure that maintains information
about a stream. BUFSIZ defines the default size of stream buffers, in bytes.


Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
clearerr                          Clears the error indicator for a stream

fclose                            Closes a stream

fcloseall                         Closes all open streams

fdopen                            Associates a stream with an open file
                                    handle

feof                              Tests for end-of-file on a stream

ferror                            Tests for error on a stream

fflush                            Flushes a stream

fgetc                             Reads a character from a stream
                                    (function version)

fgetchar                          Reads a character from stdin (function
                                    version)

fgetpos                           Gets the position indicator of a stream

fgets                             Reads a string from a stream

fileno                            Gets the file handle associated with a
                                    stream

flushall                          Flushes all streams

fopen                             Opens a stream

fprintf                           Writes formatted data to a stream

fputc                             Writes a character to a stream (function
                                    version)

fputchar                          Writes a character to stdout (function
                                    version)

fputs                             Writes a string to a stream

fread                             Reads unformatted data from a stream

freopen                           Reassigns a FILE pointer to a new file

fscanf                            Reads formatted data from a stream

fseek                             Moves file position to a given location

fsetpos                           Sets the position indicator of a stream

_fsopen                           Opens a stream with file sharing

ftell                             Gets current file position

fwrite                            Writes unformatted data items to a
                                    stream

getc                              Reads a character from a stream

getchar                           Reads a character from stdin

gets                              Reads a line from stdin

getw                              Reads a binary int item from a stream

printf                            Writes formatted data to stdout

putc                              Writes a character to a stream

putchar                           Writes a character to stdout

puts                              Writes a line to a stream

putw                              Writes a binary int item to a stream

rewind                            Moves file position to beginning of a
                                    stream

rmtmp                             Removes temporary files created by
                                    tmpfile

scanf                             Reads formatted data from stdin

setbuf                            Controls stream buffering

setvbuf                           Controls stream buffering and buffer
                                    size

sprintf                           Writes formatted data to a string

sscanf                            Reads formatted data from a string

tempnam                           Generates a temporary file name in given
                                    directory

tmpfile                           Creates a temporary file

tmpnam                            Generates a temporary file name

ungetc                            Places a character in the buffer

vfprintf                          Writes formatted data to a stream

vprintf                           Writes formatted data to stdout

vsprintf                          Writes formatted data to a string


2.7.2.1  Opening a Stream

A stream must be opened using the fdopen, fopen, freopen, or _fsopen
function before input and output can be performed on that stream. When
opening a stream, the named stream can be opened for reading, writing, or
both, and can be opened in either text or binary mode.

The fdopen, fopen, freopen, and _fsopen functions return a FILE pointer. You
normally assign the pointer value to a variable and use the variable to
refer to the opened stream. For instance, if your program contains the lines


    FILE *infile
    infile = fopen ("test.dat", "r");

you can use the FILE pointer variable  infile  to refer to the stream.


2.7.2.2  Using Predefined Stream Pointers

When a program begins execution, the C start-up code automatically opens
several streams: standard input, standard output, and standard error. By
default, the standard input, standard output, and standard error streams are
directed to the console (keyboard and screen). This means that when a
program expects input from the "standard input," it receives that input from
the console. Similarly, a program that writes to the "standard output"
prints its data to the console. Error messages generated by the library
routines are sent to the "standard error," meaning that error messages
appear on the user's console.

Under DOS, two additional streams are opened: standard auxiliary and
standard print. (These streams are not available in OS/2.) The assignment of
standard auxiliary and standard print depends on the machine configuration.
These streams usually refer to the first serial port and a printer port, but
those ports may not be available on some systems. Be sure to check your
machine configuration before using these streams.

You can refer to the standard streams with the following predefined stream
pointers:

Pointer                           Stream
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
stdin                             Standard input

stdout                            Standard output

stderr                            Standard error

stdaux                            Standard auxiliary (DOS only)

stdprn                            Standard print (DOS only)

You can use these pointers in any function that requires a stream pointer as
an argument. Some functions, such as getchar and putchar, are designed to
use stdin or stdout automatically. The pointers stdin, stdout, stderr,
stdaux, and stdprn are constants, not variables; do not try to assign them a
new stream pointer value.

DOS and OS/2 allow you to redirect a program's standard input and standard
output at the operating-system command level. OS/2 also allows you to
redirect a program's standard error. See your operating system user's manual
for a complete discussion of redirection.

Within your program, you can use freopen to redirect stdin, stdout, stderr,
stdaux, or stdprn so that it refers to a disk file or to a device. See the
reference description of freopen for more details.


2.7.2.3  Controlling Stream Buffering

As mentioned earlier, stream routines can use in-memory buffers to speed I/O
operations. Files opened using the stream routines are buffered by default,
except for stdaux and stdprn, which are normally unbuffered. The stdout and
stderr streams are flushed whenever they are full or (if you are writing to
a character device) after each library call.

By using the setbuf or setvbuf function, you can cause a stream to be
unbuffered, or you can associate a buffer with an unbuffered stream. Buffers
allocated by the system are not accessible to you, but buffers allocated
with setbuf or  setvbuf refer to arrays in your program and can be
manipulated. Buffers can be any size up to 32,767 bytes. This size is set by
the manifest constant BUFSIZ in STDIO.H if you use seftbuf; if you use
setvbuf, you can set the size of the buffer yourself. (See the descriptions
of setbuf and setvbuf in the reference section for more details.)

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
NOTE

These routines affect only buffers created by C library routines. They have
no effect on buffers created by the operating system.
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


2.7.2.4  Closing Streams

The fclose and fcloseall functions close a stream or streams. The fclose
routine closes a single specified stream; fcloseall closes all open streams
except stdin, stdout, stderr, stdaux, and stdprn. If your program does not
explicitly close a stream, the stream is automatically closed when the
program terminates. How-ever, it is a good practice to close a stream when
your program is finished with it, as the number of streams that can be open
at a given time is limited.


2.7.2.5  Reading and Writing Data

The stream functions allow you to transfer data in a variety of ways. You
can read and write binary data (a sequence of bytes), or specify reading and
writing by characters, lines, or more complicated formats.

Reading and writing operations on streams always begin at the current
position of the stream, known as the "file pointer" for the stream. The file
pointer is changed to reflect the new position after a read or write
operation takes place. For example, if you read a single character from a
stream, the file pointer is increased by one byte so that the next operation
begins with the first unread character. If a stream is opened for appending,
the file pointer is automatically positioned at the end of the file before
each write operation.

The fseek and fsetpos functions allow you to position the file pointer
anywhere in a file. The next operation occurs at the position you specified.
The rewind routine positions the file pointer at the beginning of the file.
Use the ftell or fgetpos routine to determine the current position of the
file pointer.

The feof macro detects an end-of-file condition on a stream. Once the
end-of-file indicator is set, it remains set until the file is closed, or
until clearerr, fseek, fsetpos, or rewind is called.

Streams associated with a character-oriented device (such as a console) do
not have file pointers. Data coming from or going to a console cannot be
accessed randomly. Routines that set or get the file-pointer position (such
as fseek, fgetpos, fsetpos, ftell, or rewind) have undefined results if used
on a stream associated with a character-oriented device.


2.7.2.6  Detecting Errors

When an error occurs in a stream operation, an error indicator for the
stream is set. You can use the ferror macro to test the error indicator and
determine whether an error has occurred. Once an error has occurred, the
error indicator for the stream remains set until the stream is closed, or
until you explicitly clear the error indicator by calling clearerr or
rewind.


2.7.3  Low-Level Routines

Low-level input and output calls do not buffer or format data. Declarations
for the low-level functions are given in the include files IO.H, FCNTL.H,
SYS\TYPES.H, and SYS\STAT.H. Unlike the stream functions, low-level
functions do not require the include file STDIO.H. However, some common
constants are defined in STDIO.H; for example, the end-of-file indicator
(EOF) may be useful. If your program requires these constants, you must
include STDIO.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
close                             Closes a file

creat                             Creates a file

dup                               Creates a second handle for a file

dup2                              Reassigns a handle to a file

eof                               Tests for end-of-file

lseek                             Repositions file pointer to a given
                                    location

open                              Opens a file

read                              Reads data from a file

sopen                             Opens a file for file sharing

tell                              Gets current file-pointer position

umask                             Sets default file-permission mask

write                             Writes data to a file


2.7.3.1  Opening a File

You must open a file before performing I/O functions on it. The open
function opens a file; it can also create the file when opening it. In OS/2
and DOS versions 3.0 and later, you can use sopen to open a file with
file-sharing attributes. The creat function can create and open a file.

The file can be opened for reading, writing, or both, and opened in either
text or binary mode (see Section 2.7.1, "Text and Binary Modes"). The
include file FCNTL.H must be included when opening a file, as it contains
definitions for flags used in open. In some cases, the files SYS\TYPES.H and
SYS\STAT.H must also be included; for more information, see the reference
description for the open function.

These functions return a file handle, which is normally assigned to an
integer variable. You use the variable to refer to the opened file.


2.7.3.2  Reading and Writing Data

Use the read and write routines to read and write to files. These operations
begin at the current position in the file. The current position is updated
each time a read or write operation occurs.

The lseek function allows you to place the file pointer anywhere in the
file. The next operation occurs at the position you specified. The tell
function indicates the current position of the file pointer. The eof routine
tests for the end of the file.

Low-level I/O routines set the errno variable when an error occurs. Chapter
3, "Global Variables and Standard Types," describes errno.

Character-oriented devices, such as the console, do not have file pointers.
The lseek and tell routines have undefined results if used on a handle
associated with a device.


2.7.3.3  Closing Files

The close function closes an open file. Open files are automatically closed
when a program terminates. However, it is a good practice to close a file
when your program is finished with it, as there is a limit to the number of
files that can be open at one time.


2.7.3.4  Using Predefined Handles

When a program begins execution, three files are automatically opened:
standard input, standard output, and standard error. In DOS, two additional
files are opened: standard auxiliary and standard print. (These files are
not available in OS/2.)

Low-level routines can access these files using the following predefined
handles:

Stream                            Handle
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
stdin                             0

stdout                            1

stderr                            2

stdaux (DOS only)                 3

stdprn (DOS only)                 4

You can use these file handles without previously opening the files. The
files are opened and the handles are assigned when the program starts.

The dup and dup2 functions allow you to assign multiple handles for the same
file. These functions are typically used to associate the predefined file
handles with different files.

In DOS and OS/2, you can redirect the standard input and standard output at
the operating-system command level. OS/2 also allows you to redirect the
standard error. See your operating system user's manual for a complete
discussion of redirection.


2.7.4  Console and Port I/O

The console and port I/O routines are implemented as functions and are
declared in the include file CONIO.H. These functions perform reading and
writing operations on your console or on the specified port. The cgets,
cscanf, getch, getche, and kbhit routines take input from the console, while
cprintf, cputs, putch, and ungetch write to the console. The input or output
of these functions can be redirected.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
cgets                             Reads a string from the console

cprintf                           Writes formatted data to the console

cputs                             Writes a string to the console

cscanf                            Reads formatted data from the console

getch                             Reads a character from the console

getche                            Reads a character from the console and
                                    echoes it

inp                               Reads one byte from the specified I/O
                                    port

inpw                              Reads a two-byte word from the specified
                                    I/O port

kbhit                             Checks for a keystroke at the console

outp                              Writes one byte to the specified I/O
                                    port

outpw                             Writes a two-byte word to the specified
                                    I/O port

putch                             Writes a character to the console

ungetch                           "Ungets" the last character read from
                                    the console so that it becomes the next
                                    character read

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
NOTE

Programs that need only run under DOS can also use a number of direct DOS
I/O system calls ( _dos_open, _dos_read, _dos_close, etc.) These are
described in detail in Section 2.14, "System Calls."
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The console or port does not have to be opened or closed before I/O is
performed, so there are no open or close routines in this category. The port
I/O routines inp and outp read or write one byte at a time from the
specified port. The inpw and outpw routines read and write two-byte words,
respectively.

The console I/O routines allow reading and writing of strings (cgets and
cputs), formatted data (cscanf and cprintf), and characters. Several options
are available when reading and writing characters.

The putch routine writes a single character to the console. The getch and
getche routines read a single character from the console; getche echoes the
character back to the console, while getch does not. The ungetch routine
"ungets" the last character read; the next read operation on the console
begins with the "ungotten" character.

The kbhit routine determines whether a key has been struck at the console.
This routine allows you to test for keyboard input before you attempt to
read from the console.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
NOTE

The console I/O routines are not compatible with stream or low-level library
routines and should not be used with them.
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


2.8  Internationalization

Internationalization routines are useful for creating different versions of
a program for international markets. These routines are declared in the
header file LOCALE.H, except for strftime, which is declared in TIME.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
localeconv                        Sets a structure with appropriate values
                                    for formatting numeric quantities

setlocale                         Selects the appropriate locale for the
                                    program

strcoll                           Compares strings using locale-specific
                                    information

strftime                          Formats a date and time string

strxfrm                           Transforms a string based on
                                    locale-specific
                                    information


2.9  Math

The math routines allow you to perform common mathematical calculations. All
math routines work with floating-point values and therefore require
floating-point support (see Section 1.8, "Floating-Point Support").


The math library provides two versions of some routines. The first version
of the routine supports double arguments and return values. The second
version supports an 80-bit data type, allowing the routine to take long
double arguments and return a long double value. The second version usually
has the same name with the suffix l. For instance, the acos routine supports
double arguments and return values, while acosl supports long double
arguments and return values.

Routines which support long double values are not available when you compile
with the /Fpa (alternate math) compiler option. The same is true of the
_clear 87, _control87, and _status87 routines.


Most math declarations are in the include file MATH.H. However, the
_clear87, _control87, _fpreset, and _status87 routines are defined in
FLOAT.H, the abs and labs functions are defined in MATH.H and STDLIB.H, and
the div and ldiv routines are declared in STDLIB.H.


Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
acos, acosl                       Calculate the arccosine

asin, asinl                       Calculate the arcsine

atan, atanl                       Calculate the arctangent

atan2, atan2l                     Calculate the arctangent

bessel                            Calculates Bessel functions

cabs, cabsl                       Find the absolute value of a complex
                                    number

ceil, ceill                       Find the integer ceiling

_clear87                          Gets and clears the floating-point
                                    status word

_control87                        Gets the old floating-point control word
                                    and sets a new control-word value

cos, cosl                         Calculate the cosine

cosh, coshl                       Calculate the hyperbolic cosine

dieeetomsbin                      Converts IEEE double-precision number to
                                    Microsoft (MS) binary format

div                               Divides one integer by another,
                                    returning the quotient and remainder

dmsbintoieee                      Converts Microsoft binary
                                    double-precision number to IEEE format

exp, expl                         Calculate the exponential function

fabs, fabsl                       Find the absolute value

fieeetomsbin                      Converts IEEE single-precision number to
                                    Microsoft binary format

floor, floorl                     Find the largest integer less than or
                                    equal to the
                                    argument

fmod, fmodl                       Find the floating-point remainder

fmsbintoieee                      Converts Microsoft binary
                                    single-precision number to IEEE format

_fpreset                          Reinitializes the floating-point-math
                                    package

frexp, frexpl                     Calculate an exponential value

hypot, hypotl                     Calculate the hypotenuse of right
                                    triangle

ldexp, ldexpl                     Calculate the product of the argument
                                    and 2exp

ldiv                              Divides one long integer by another,
                                    returning the quotient and remainder

log, logl                         Calculate the natural logarithm

log10, log10l                     Calculate the base-10 logarithm

_lrotl,  _lrotr                   Shift an unsigned long int item left (
                                    _lrotl) or right ( _lrotr)

matherr,  _matherrl               Handle math errors

max, min                          Return the larger or smaller of two
                                    values

modf, modfl                       Break down the argument into integer and
                                    fractional parts

pow, powl                         Calculate a value raised to a power

rand                              Gets a pseudorandom number

_rotl,  _rotr                     Shift an unsigned int item left ( _rotl)
                                    or right
                                    ( _rotr)

sin, sinl                         Calculate the sine

sinh, sinhl                       Calculate the hyperbolic sine

sqrt, sqrtl                       Find the square root

srand                             Initializes a pseudorandom series

_status87                         Gets the floating-point status word

tan, tanl                         Calculate the tangent

tanh, tanhl                       Calculate the hyperbolic tangent

The bessel routine does not correspond to a single function, but to twelve
functions named j0, j1, jn, y0, y1, yn,  _j0l,  _j1l,  _jnl,  _y0l,  _y1l,
and  _ynl.

The matherr and _matherrl routines are invoked by the math functions when
errors occur. The matherr routine handles functions that return a double
value and _matherrl handles routines that return a long double.

These routines are defined in the library, but you can redefine them for
different error-handling. The user-defined function, if given, must follow
the rules given in the reference description of matherr and _matherrl.

You are not required to supply a definition for the matherr routines. If no
definition is present, the default error returns for each routine are used.
The reference description of each routine describes that routine's error
returns.


2.10  Memory Allocation

The memory-allocation routines allow you to allocate, free, and reallocate
blocks of memory. Memory-allocation routines are declared in the include
file MALLOC.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
alloca                            Allocates a block of memory from the
                                    program's stack

_bfreeseg                         Frees a based heap

_bheapseg                         Allocates a based heap

calloc,  _bcalloc,  _fcalloc,     Allocate storage for an array
_ncalloc

_expand,  _bexpand,  _fexpand,    Expand or shrink a block of memory
_nexpand                          without moving its location

free,  _bfree,  _ffree,  _nfree   Free an allocated block

_freect                           Returns approximate number of items of
                                    given size that could be allocated in
                                    the near heap

halloc                            Allocates storage for huge array

_heapadd,  _bheapadd              Add memory to a heap

_heapchk,  _bheapchk,  _fheapchk  Check a heap for consistency
, _nheapchk

_heapmin,  _bheapmin,             Release unused memory in a heap
_fheapmin,  _nheapmin

_heapset,  _bheapset,  _fheapset  Fill free heap entries with a specified
, _nheapset                       value

_heapwalk,  _bheapwalk,           Return information about each entry in a
_fheapwalk, _nheapwalk            heap

hfree                             Frees a block allocated by halloc

malloc,  _bmalloc,  _fmalloc,     Allocate a block of memory
_nmalloc

_memavl                           Returns approximate number of bytes
                                    available for allocation in the near
                                    heap

_memmax                           Returns size of largest contiguous free
                                    block in the near heap

_msize,  _bmsize,  _fmsize,       Return size of an allocated block
_nmsize

realloc,  _brealloc,  _frealloc,  Reallocate a block to a new size
_nrealloc

stackavail                        Returns size of stack space available
                                    for allocation with alloca

Some memory-management routines, such as malloc, are available in different
versions that begin with _b, _f, or _n. These variations are described in
the following section.

The malloc and free routines allocate and free memory space, respectively,
while a program runs. The malloc routine allocates memory from the "heap,"
which is a pool of memory not otherwise used by your program. In tiny-,
small-, and medium-model programs, the heap consists of unused memory in
your program's default data segment. In compact-, large-, and huge-model
programs, it is unused memory outside the default data segment.

The malloc and free routines satisfy the memory-allocation requirements of
most programs. More specialized memory-management routines are discussed
below.

The realloc and _expand routines can expand or shrink an allocated memory
block. They behave differently in cases in which there is not enough room to
expand the block in its current location. In this case, realloc moves the
block as needed, but _expand does not.

The calloc routine allocates memory for an array and initializes every byte
in the allocated block to 0.

The halloc routine is similar to calloc, except that it can allocate memory
for a huge array (one that exceeds 64K in size). This routine is useful when
you need a very large data object, or if you need to return allocated memory
to the operating system for subsequent calls to the spawn family of
functions.


2.10.1  Near and Far Heaps

As mentioned in the previous section, heap memory can reside inside or
outside your program's default data segment, depending on what memory model
your program uses. When it lies inside the default data segment, the heap is
called the "near heap," since it can be accessed with near pointers. The
"far heap" is memory that spans one or more segments outside the default
data segment. The far heap can be accessed only with far pointers.

In various memory models, malloc automatically allocates memory from the
near heap or far heap, as appropriate. The C library also includes near and
far versions of malloc, free, and other memory-management routines, which
allow you to specify the near and far heaps explicitly. These have the same
names as standard memory routines, but are preceded by _n (for near) or _f
(for far).

For instance, the _nmalloc routine always allocates memory from the near
heap and returns a near pointer, no matter which memory model your program
uses. Use _nfree to release memory allocated with _nmalloc.

Similarly, _fmalloc always allocates memory from the far heap and returns a
far pointer, regardless of memory model. Use the _ffree routine to release
memory allocated with _fmalloc.


2.10.2  Based Heaps

You can also allocate memory from a "based heap," which is a single segment
that lies outside the default data segment. Based-heap routines generally
use the same names as standard memory routines, but begin with _b. For
instance, _bmalloc allocates a memory block from the based heap and _bfree
frees the block.

Based heaps offer the following advantages:


    ■   Localized data. Based heaps allow you to group related data in a
        single segment. This can simplify the management of related data. In
        OS/2, based heaps can also minimize the risk of general protection
        faults and improve performance.

    ■   Faster pointer arithmetic. Although the based heap lies in the far
        data segment, pointers to its data items are the same size as near
        pointers. Thus, pointer arithmetic on items in a based heap is faster
        than pointer arithmetic on items in the far heap.


The _bheapseg routine allocates a based heap segment, from which you can
then allocate blocks of memory. You can call _bheapseg more than once to
allocate as many based-heap segments as needed (within the confines of
available memory).

The _bfreeseg routine frees a based-heap segment. This routine frees every
block in the based-heap segment, whether or not you previously freed the
blocks individually.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
NOTE
Near- , far- , and based-heap calls are not ANSI compatible and will make
your program less portable.
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


2.11  Process and Environment Control

The process-control routines allow you to start, stop, and manage processes
from within a program. Environment-control routines allow you to get and
change information about the operating-system environment.

A "process" is a program being executed by the operating system. It consists
of the program's code and data, plus information about the process, such as
the number of open files. Whenever you execute a program at the
operating-system level, you start a process.

All process-control functions except signal are declared in the include file
PROCESS.H. The signal function is declared in SIGNAL.H. The abort, exit, and
system functions are also declared in the STDLIB.H include file. The
environment-control routines (getenv and putenv) are declared in STDLIB.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
abort                             Aborts a process without flushing
                                    buffers or calling functions registered
                                    by atexit and onexit

assert                            Tests for logic error

atexit                            Schedules routines for execution at
                                    program
                                    termination

_beginthread                      Creates an execution thread (OS/2 only)

_cexit                            Performs the exit termination procedures
                                    (such as flushing buffers) and returns
                                    control to the calling program

_c_exit                           Performs the _exit termination
                                    procedures and returns control to the
                                    calling program

cwait                             Suspends the calling process until a
                                    specified child process terminates (OS/2
                                    only)

_endthread                        Terminates an execution thread (OS/2
                                    only)

execl                             Executes child process with argument
                                    list

execle                            Executes child process with argument
                                    list and given environment

execlp                            Executes child process using PATH
                                    variable and argument list

execlpe                           Executes child process using PATH
                                    variable, given environment, and
                                    argument list

execv                             Executes child process with argument
                                    array

execve                            Executes child process with argument
                                    array and given environment

execvp                            Executes child process using PATH
                                    variable and argument array

execvpe                           Executes child process using PATH
                                    variable, given environment, and
                                    argument array

exit                              Calls functions registered by atexit and
                                    onexit, then flushes all buffers and
                                    closes all open files before terminating
                                    the process

_exit                             Terminates process without processing
                                    atexit or onexit functions or flushing
                                    buffers

getenv                            Gets the value of an environment
                                    variable

getpid                            Gets process ID number

longjmp                           Restores a saved stack environment

onexit                            Schedules routines for execution at
                                    program
                                    termination

_pclose                           Waits for a child command and closes a
                                    pipe on the associated stream

perror                            Prints error message

_pipe                             Creates a pipe

_popen                            Creates a pipe and asynchronously
                                    executes a child copy of the command
                                    processor

putenv                            Adds or changes the value of an
                                    environment
                                    variable

raise                             Sends a signal to the calling process

setjmp                            Saves a stack environment

signal                            Handles an interrupt signal

spawnl                            Executes child process with argument
                                    list

spawnle                           Executes child process with argument
                                    list and given environment

spawnlp                           Executes child process using PATH
                                    variable and argument list

spawnlpe                          Executes child process using PATH
                                    variable, given environment, and
                                    argument list

spawnv                            Executes child process with argument
                                    array

spawnve                           Executes child process with argument
                                    array and given environment

spawnvp                           Executes child process using PATH
                                    variable and argument array

spawnvpe                          Executes child process using PATH
                                    variable, given environment, and
                                    argument array

system                            Executes an operating system command

wait                              Suspends the calling process until any
                                    of the caller's immediate child
                                    processes terminate (OS/2 only)

The atexit and onexit routines create a list of functions to be executed
when the calling program terminates. The only difference between the two is
that atexit is part of the ANSI standard. The onexit function is offered for
compatibility with previous versions of Microsoft C.

The _exit routine terminates a process immediately, whereas exit terminates
the process only after flushing buffers and calling any functions previously
registered by atexit and onexit. The _cexit and _c_exit routines are
identical to exit and _exit, respectively, except that they return control
to the calling program without terminating the process.

The setjmp and longjmp routines save and restore a stack environment. These
allow you to execute a nonlocal goto.

The exec and spawn routines start a new process called the "child" process.
The difference between the exec and spawn routines is that the spawn
routines are capable of returning control from the child process to its
caller (the "parent" process). Both the parent process and the child process
are present in memory (unless P_OVERLAY is specified). In the exec routines,
the child process overlays the parent process, so returning control to the
parent process is impossible (unless an error occurs when attempting to
start execution of the child process).

There are eight forms each of the spawn and exec routines (see Table 2.1).
The differences among the forms involve the method of locating the file to
be executed as the child process, the method for passing arguments to the
child process, and the method of setting the environment.

Passing an argument list means that the arguments to the child process are
listed separately in the exec or spawn call. Passing an argument array means
that the arguments are stored in an array, and a pointer to the array is
passed to the child process. The argument-list method is typically used when
the number of arguments is constant or is known at compile time. The
argument-array method is useful when the number of arguments must be
determined at run time.

Several process-control routines take advantage of the multitasking
capability of OS/2. The _beginthread and _endthread routines create and
terminate execution threads. The cwait and wait routines suspend the calling
process until one child process terminates. The _pipe, _popen, and _pclose
routines create and manipulate pipes, which link processes for sequential
execution.

Table 2.1  Forms of the spawn and exec Routines

╓┌───────────────────┌──────────────────┌────────────────────┌───────────────►
                                        Argument-Passing
Routines            Locating the File  Convention           Environment
                                                            Settings
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
execl, spawnl       Do not use PATH    Argument list        Inherited from
                                                            parent

execle, spawnle     Do not use PATH    Argument list        Pointer to
                                                            environment table
                                                            for child process
                                                            passed as last
                                                            argument

execlp, spawnlp     Use PATH           Argument list        Inherited from
                                                            parent
                                        Argument-Passing
Routines            Locating the File  Convention           Environment
                                                            Settings
                                                            parent

execlpe, spawnlpe   Use PATH           Argument list        Pointer to
                                                            environment table
                                                            for child process
                                                            passed as last
                                                            argument

execv, spawnv       Do not use PATH    Argument array       Inherited from
                                                            parent

execve, spawnve     Do not use PATH    Argument array       Pointer to
                                                            environment table
                                                            for child process
                                                            passed as last
                                                            argument

execvp, spawnvp     Use PATH           Argument array       Inherited from
                                        Argument-Passing
Routines            Locating the File  Convention           Environment
                                                            Settings
execvp, spawnvp     Use PATH           Argument array       Inherited from
                                                            parent

execvpe, spawnvpe   Use PATH           Argument array       Pointer to
                                                            environment table
                                                            for child process
                                                            passed as last
                                                            argument

─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────



The assert macro is typically used to test for logic errors. It prints a
message when a given "assertion" fails to hold true. Defining the identifier
NDEBUG to any value causes occurrences of assert to be removed from the
source file, thus allowing you to turn off assertion checking without
modifying the source file.


2.12  Searching and Sorting

Search and sort routines provide binary-search, linear-search, and
quick-sort capabilities. They are all declared in SEARCH.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
bsearch                           Performs binary search

lfind                             Performs linear search for given value

lsearch                           Performs linear search for given value,
                                    which is added to array if not found

qsort                             Performs quick sort


2.13  String Manipulation

The string functions are declared in the include file STRING.H. They allow
you to compare strings, copy them, search for strings and characters, and
perform various other operations.


Routines beginning with _f are model-independent versions of the
corresponding routines and are useful in mixed-model programs. These
routines can be called from any point in the program, regardless of which
model is being used.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
strcat,   _fstrcat                Append one string to another

strchr,  _fstrchr                 Find first occurrence of a given
                                    character in a string

strcmp,  _fstrcmp                 Compare two strings

strcpy,  _fstrcpy                 Copy one string to another

strcspn,  _fstrcspn               Find first occurrence of a character
                                    from a given character set in a string

strdup,  _fstrdup, _nstrdup       Duplicate a string

strerror                          Maps an error number to a message string

_strerror                         Maps a user-defined error message to a
                                    string

stricmp,  _fstricmp               Compare two strings without regard to
                                    case

strlen,  _fstrlen                 Find length of string

strlwr,  _fstrlwr                 Convert string to lowercase

strncat,  _fstrncat               Append characters of a string

strncmp,  _fstrncmp               Compare characters of two strings

strncpy,  _fstrncpy               Copy characters of one string to another

strnicmp,  _fstrnicmp             Compare characters of two strings
                                    without regard
                                    to case

strnset,  _fstrnset               Set characters of a string to a given
                                    character

strpbrk,  _fstrpbrk               Find first occurrence of a character
                                    from one string in another

strrchr,  _fstrrchr               Find last occurrence of a given
                                    character in string

strrev,  _fstrrev                 Reverse string

strset,  _fstrset                 Set all characters of a string to a
                                    given character

strspn,  _fstrspn                 Find first substring from a given
                                    character set in a string

strstr,  _fstrstr                 Find first occurrence of a given string
                                    in another string

strtok,  _fstrtok                 Find next token in a string

strupr,  _fstrupr                 Convert a string to uppercase

All string functions work on null-terminated character strings. When working
with character arrays that do not end with a null character, you can use the
buffer-manipulation routines, described in Section 2.1.


2.14  System Calls

The following routines give access to IBM-PC BIOS interrupts and DOS system
calls. Except for the FP_OFF, FP_SEG, and segread routines, these routines
are for DOS application programs only; they do not work under OS/2.


2.14.1  BIOS Interface

The functions in this category provide direct access to the BIOS interrupt
services. They are all declared in BIOS.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_bios_disk                        Issues service requests for both hard
                                    and floppy disks, using INT 0x13

_bios_equiplist                   Performs an equipment check, using INT
                                    0x11

_bios_keybrd                      Provides access to keyboard services,
                                    using
                                    INT 0x16

_bios_memsize                     Obtains information about available
                                    memory, using INT 0x12

_bios_printer                     Performs printer output services, using
                                    INT 0x17

_bios_serialcom                   Performs serial communications tasks,
                                    using
                                    INT 0x14

_bios_timeofday                   Provides access to system clock, using
                                    INT 0x1A

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
NOTE
BIOS routines are hardware dependent. Some of them may not work as expected
on machines whose hardware differs from the IBM PC.
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


2.14.2  DOS Interface

These routines are implemented as functions and declared in DOS.H.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
bdos                              Invokes DOS system call; uses only DX
                                    and AL registers

_chain_intr                       Chains one interrupt handler to another

_disable                          Disables interrupts

_dos_allocmem                     Allocates a block of memory, using DOS
                                    system call 0x48

_dos_close                        Closes a file, using DOS system call
                                    0x3E

_dos_creat                        Creates a new file and erases any
                                    existing file having the same name,
                                    using DOS system call 0x3C

_dos_creatnew                     Creates a new file and returns an error
                                    if a file having the same name exists,
                                    using DOS system
                                    call 0x5B

_dos_findfirst                    Finds first occurrence of a given file,
                                    using DOS system call 0x4E

_dos_findnext                     Finds subsequent occurrences of a given
                                    file, using DOS system call 0x4F

_dos_freemem                      Frees a block of memory, using DOS
                                    system
                                    call 0x49

_dos_getdate                      Gets the system date, using DOS system
                                    call 0x2A

_dos_getdiskfree                  Gets information on a disk volume, using
                                    DOS system call 0x36

_dos_getdrive                     Gets the current default drive, using
                                    DOS system call 0x19

_dos_getfileattr                  Gets current attributes of a file or
                                    directory, using DOS system call 0x43

_dos_getftime                     Gets the date and time a file was last
                                    written, using DOS system call 0x57

_dos_gettime                      Gets the current system time, using DOS
                                    system
                                    call 0x2C

_dos_getvect                      Gets the current value of a specified
                                    interrupt vector, using DOS system call
                                    0x35

_dos_keep                         Installs terminate-and-stay-resident
                                    (TSR) programs using DOS system call
                                    0x31

_dos_open                         Opens an existing file, using DOS system
                                    call 0x3D

_dos_read                         Reads a file, using DOS system call 0x3F


_dos_setblock                     Changes the size of a previously
                                    allocated block, using DOS system call
                                    0x4A

_dos_setdate                      Sets the current system date, using DOS
                                    system
                                    call 0x2B

_dos_setdrive                     Sets the default disk drive, using DOS
                                    system
                                    call 0x0E

_dos_setfileattr                  Sets the current attributes of a file,
                                    using DOS system call 0x43

_dos_setftime                     Sets the date and time that the
                                    specified file was last written, using
                                    DOS system call 0x57

_dos_settime                      Sets the system time, using DOS system
                                    call 0x2D

_dos_setvect                      Sets a new value for the specified
                                    interrupt vector, using DOS system call
                                    0x25

_dos_write                        Sends output to a file, using DOS system
                                    call 0x40

dosexterr                         Obtains in-depth error information from
                                    DOS system call 0x59

_enable                           Enables interrupts

FP_OFF                            Returns offset portion of a far pointer
                                    (OS/2
                                    and DOS)

FP_SEG                            Returns segment portion of a far pointer
                                    (OS/2
                                    and DOS)

_harderr                          Establishes a hardware error handler

_hardresume                       Returns to DOS after a hardware error

_hardretn                         Returns to the application after a
                                    hardware error

int86                             Invokes DOS interrupts

int86x                            Invokes DOS interrupts with segment
                                    register values

intdos                            Invokes DOS system call using registers
                                    other than DX and AL

intdosx                           Invokes DOS system call using registers
                                    other than DX and AL with segment
                                    register values

segread                           Returns current values of segment
                                    registers (OS/2 and DOS)

The _harderr routine is used to define a hardware-error interrupt handler.
The _hardresume and _hardretn routines are used within a hardware error
handler to define the return from the error.

The dosexterr function obtains and stores the error information returned by
DOS system call 0x59 (extended error handling). This function is provided
for use with DOS versions 3.0 and later.

The bdos routine is useful for invoking DOS calls that use either or both of
the DX (DH/DL) and AL registers for arguments. However, bdos should not be
used to invoke system calls that return an error code in AX if the carry
flag is set; since your program cannot detect whether the carry flag is set,
it cannot determine whether the value in AX is a legitimate value or an
error value. In this case, the intdos routine should be used instead, since
it allows the program to detect whether the carry flag is set. The intdos
routine can also be used to invoke DOS calls that use registers other than
DX and AL.

The intdosx routine is similar to the intdos routine, but is used when ES is
required by the system call, when DS must contain a value other than the
default data segment (for instance, when a far pointer is used), or when
making the system call in a large-model program. When calling intdosx, give
an argument that specifies the segment values to be used in the call.

The int86 routine can be used to invoke any interrupt. The int86x routine is
similar; however, like the intdosx routine, it is designed to work with
large-model programs and far items, as described in the preceding paragraph.


The FP_OFF and FP_SEG routines allow easy access to the segment and offset
portions of a far pointer value. FP_OFF and FP_SEG are implemented as macros
and defined in DOS.H. You can use these macros in OS/2 as well as DOS.

The segread routine returns the current values of the segment registers.
This routine is typically used with the intdosx and int86x routines to
obtain the correct segment values.

The _chain_intr routine is useful for chaining interrupt handlers together.
The _enable routine enables interrupts, while the _disable routine disables
interrupts.

The routines prefixed with  _dos_  are all direct system interfaces that use
the system calls noted above. More detailed information on these system
calls can be found in the MS-DOS Encyclopedia (Duncan, ed.; Redmond, WA:
Microsoft Press, 1988)or the Programmer's PC Sourcebook (Hogan; Redmond, WA:
Microsoft Press, 1988).

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
NOTE

The DOS interface I/O routines are generally incompatible with console,
low-level, and stream I/O routines. Do not mix different types of I/O
routines in the same source file.
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


2.15  Time

The time functions allow you to obtain the current time, then convert and
store it according to your particular needs. The current time is always
taken from the system time.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
asctime                           Converts time from type struct tm to a
                                    character string

clock                             Returns the elapsed CPU time for a
                                    process

ctime                             Converts time from a long integer to a
                                    character string

difftime                          Computes the difference between two
                                    times

ftime                             Puts current system time in variable of
                                    type
                                    struct tm

gmtime                            Converts time from integer to struct tm

localtime                         Converts time from integer to struct tm
                                    with local correction

mktime                            Converts time to a calendar value

_strdate                          Returns the current system date as a
                                    string

strftime                          Formats a date and time string

_strtime                          Returns the current system time as a
                                    string

time                              Gets current system time as a long
                                    integer

tzset                             Sets external time variables from the
                                    environment time variable

utime                             Sets file-modification time

The time and ftime functions return the current time as the number of
seconds elapsed since midnight Universal Coordinated Time (UTC) on January
1, 1970. This value can be converted, adjusted, and stored in a variety of
ways by using the asctime, ctime, gmtime, localtime, and mktime functions.
The utime function sets the modification time for a specified file, using
either the current time or a time value stored in a structure.

The clock function returns the elapsed CPU time for the calling process.

The ftime function requires two files: SYS\TYPES.H and SYS\TIMEB.H. It is
declared in SYS\TIMEB.H. The utime function also requires two include files:
SYS\TYPES.H and SYS\UTIME.H. It is declared in SYS\UTIME.H. The remainder of
the time functions are declared in the include file TIME.H.

When you want to use ftime or localtime to make adjustments for local time,
you must define an environment variable named TZ. Section 3.2, which
describes the global variables daylight, timezone, and tzname, includes a
discussion of the TZ variable. TZ is also described on the tzset reference
page in Part 2 of this book.

The _strdate and _strtime routines return strings containing the current
date and time, respectively, in the DOS and OS/2 date and time format rather
than in the XENIX-style formats.

The stfrtime function is useful for creating international versions of a
program. See Section 2.8, "Internationalization."


2.16  Variable-Length Argument Lists

The va_arg, va_end, and va_start routines are macros that provide a portable
way to access the arguments to a function when the function takes a variable
number of arguments. Two versions of the macros are available: the macros
defined in the VARARG.H include file, which are compatible with the UNIX
System V definition, and the macros defined in STDARG.H, which conform to
the ANSI C standard.

Routine                           Use
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
va_arg                            Retrieves argument from list

va_end                            Resets pointer

va_start                          Sets pointer to beginning of argument
                                    list

For more information on the differences between the two versions and for an
explanation of how to use the macros, see their descriptions in Part 2 of
this book.






Chapter 3  Global Variables and Standard Types
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The Microsoft C Run-Time Library contains definitions for a number of
variables and standard types used by library routines. You can access these
variables and types by including in your program the files in which they are
declared, or by giving appropriate declarations in your program, as shown in
the following sections.


3.1  _amblksiz

The _amblksiz variable controls memory heap granularity.

It is declared in the MALLOC.H include file as follows:

    extern unsigned int _amblksiz;

The _amblksiz variable controls the amount of memory used in the heap for
dynamic memory allocation.

Memory space is always requested from the operating system in blocks
containing _amblksiz bytes. The first time a program calls a
memory-allocation function such as malloc, the operating system allocates a
block of heap memory. The size of this block is defined by _amblksiz, which
has a default value of 8K (8,192 bytes).

Later memory requests are satisfied from the original block. When that block
is exhausted, another block of _amblksiz bytes is allocated. If your C
program allocates a block larger than _amblksiz, multiple blocks that are
each of size _amblksiz are allocated until the request is satisfied.

To change the size of the default memory block, assign the desired size to
the _amblksiz variable, as in the following example:

    _amblksiz = 2048;

The heap allocator always rounds the operating-system request to the nearest
power of 2 greater than or equal to _amblksiz. The above statement allocates
memory in multiples of 2K (2,048 bytes).

Fewer system calls are required if you set _amblksiz to a large value, but
your program may use more memory than needed. If program speed is important,
set _amblksiz to a large value. If size is important, set _amblksiz to a
smaller value.

Note that adjusting the value of _amblksiz affects allocation in the near,
far, and based heaps. The value of _amblksiz has no effect on huge memory
blocks (those allocated with halloc and similar functions).


3.2  daylight, timezone, tzname

The daylight, timezone, and tzname variables are global timezone variables
used in time functions.

They are declared in the TIME.H include files as follows:

    extern int daylight;

    extern long timezone;

    extern char *tzname [2];

Some time and date routines use the daylight, timezone, and tzname variables
to make local-time adjustments. Whenever a program calls the ftime,
localtime, or tzset function, the value of daylight, timezone, and tzname is
determined from the value of the TZ environment variable. If you do not
explicitly set the value of TZ, the default value of PST8PDT is used. The
following list shows each variable and its value:

Variable                          Value
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
daylight                          Nonzero if a daylight-saving-time zone
                                    (DST) is specified in TZ; otherwise
                                    zero. Default value is one.

timezone                          Difference in seconds between Greenwich
                                    mean time and the local time. Default
                                    value is 28,800.

tzname[0]                         Three-letter time zone name derived from
                                    the TZ environment variable. Default
                                    value is "PST" (Pacific standard time).

tzname[1]                         Three-letter daylight-saving-time zone
                                    name derived from the TZ environment
                                    variable. Default value is PDT. If the
                                    DST zone is omitted from TZ, tzname[1]
                                    is an empty string.


3.3  _doserrno, errno, sys_errlist, sys_nerr

The _doserrno, errno, sys_errlist, and sys_nerr variables contain error
codes, and are used by the perror and _strerror routines to print error
information.

These variables are declared in the STDLIB.H include file. Manifest
constants for the errno variables are declared in the ERRNO.H include file.
The declarations are as follows:

    extern int _doserrno;

    extern int errno;

    extern char *sys_errlist[ ];

    extern int sys_nerr;

The errno variable is set to an integer value to reflect the type of error
that has occurred in a system-level call. Each errno value is associated
with an error message, which can be printed with the perror routine or
stored in a string with the strerror routine.

Note that only some routines set the errno variable. If a routine sets
errno, the description of the routine in the reference section says so
explicitly.

The value of errno reflects the error value for the last call that set
errno. However, this value is not necessarily reset by later successful
calls. To avoid confusion, test for errors immediately after a call.

The include file ERRNO.H contains the definitions of the errno values.
However, not all of the definitions given in ERRNO.H are used in DOS and
OS/2. Some of the values in ERRNO.H are present to maintain compatibility
with XENIX and UNIX operating systems.

The errno values in DOS and OS/2 are a subset of the values for errno in
XENIX systems. Thus, the errno value is not necessarily the same as the
actual error code returned by a DOS or OS/2 system call. To access the
actual DOS and OS/2 error code, use the _doserrno variable, which contains
this value.

In general, you should use _doserrno only for error detection in operations
involving input and output, since the errno values for input and output
errors have DOS and OS/2 error-code equivalents. In other cases, the value
of _doserrno is undefined.

The syserrlist variable is an array; the perror and strerror routines use it
to process error information. The sys_nerr variable tells how many elements
the sys_errlist array contains.

Table 3.1 gives the errno values for DOS and OS/2, the system error message
for each value, and the value of each constant. Note that only the ERANGE
and EDOM constants are specified in the ANSI standard.

Table   3.1 errno Values and Their Meanings

╓┌───────────┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┌────►
Constant    Meaning                                                    Value
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
E2BIG       Argument list too long                                     7
Constant    Meaning                                                    Value
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
E2BIG       Argument list too long                                     7

EACCES      Permission denied                                          13

EBADF       Bad file number                                            9

EDEADLOCK   Resource deadlock would occur                              36

EDOM        Math argument                                              33

EEXIST      File exists                                                17

EINVAL      Invalid argument                                           22

EMFILE      Too many open files                                        24

ENOENT      No such file or directory                                  2

ENOEXEC     Exec format error                                          8
Constant    Meaning                                                    Value
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
ENOEXEC     Exec format error                                          8

ENOMEM      Not enough memory                                          12

ENOSPC      No space left on device                                    28

ERANGE      Result too large                                           34

EXDEV       Cross-device link                                          18

─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────




3.4  _fmode

The _fmode variable controls the default file-translation mode.

It is declared in the STDLIB.H include file as follows:

    extern int _fmode;

By default, the value of _fmode is O_TEXT, causing files to be translated in
text mode (unless specifically opened or set to binary mode). When _fmode is
set to O_BINARY, the default mode is binary. You can set _fmode to the flag
O_BINARY by linking with BINMODE.OBJ or by assigning it the O_BINARY value.



3.5  _osmajor, _osminor, _osmode, _osversion

The _osmajor, _osminor, _osmode, and _osversion variables specify the
version number of the operating system or the current mode of operation.

They are declared in the STDLIB.H include file as follows:

    extern unsigned char _osmajor;

    extern unsigned char _osminor;

    extern unsigned char _osmode;

    extern unsigned char _osversion;

The _osmajor, _osminor, and _osversion variables specify the version number
of DOS or OS/2 currently in use. The _osmajor variable holds the "major"
version number and the _osminor variable stores the "minor" version number.
Thus, under DOS version 3.20, _osmajor is 3 and _osminor is 20. The
_osversion variable holds both values; its low byte contains the major
version number and its high byte the minor version number.

These variables are useful for creating programs that run in different
versions of DOS and OS/2. For example, you can test the _osmajor variable
before making a call to sopen; if the major version number is earlier (less)
than 3, open should be used instead of sopen.

The _osmode variable indicates whether the program is in OS/2 protected mode
or in real mode (DOS or OS/2 real mode). An _osmode value of DOS_MODE
indicates real mode operation and a value of OS2_MODE indicates protected
operation.


3.6  environ

The environ variable is a pointer to the strings in the process environment.


It is declared in the STDLIB.H include file as follows:

    extern char *environ [ ];

The environ variable provides access to memory areas containing
process-specific information.

The environ variable is an array of pointers to the strings that constitute
the process environment. The environment consists of one or more entries of
the form

NAME=string

where NAME is the name of an environment variable and string is the value of
that variable. The string may be empty. The initial environment settings are
taken from the operating-system environment at the time of program
execution.

The getenv and putenv routines use the environ variable to access and modify
the environment table. When putenv is called to add or delete environment
settings, the environment table changes size; its location in memory may
also change, depending on the program's memory requirements. The environ
variable is adjusted in these cases and always points to the correct table
location.


3.7  _psp

The _psp variable contains the segment address of the program segment prefix
(PSP) for the process.

It is declared in the STDLIB.H include file as follows:

    extern unsigned int _psp;

The PSP contains execution information about the process, such as a copy of
the command line that invoked the process and the return address on process
termination or interrupt. The _psp variable can be used to form a long
pointer to the PSP, where _psp is the segment value and 0 is the offset
value.

Note that the _psp variable is supported only in DOS.


3.8  Standard Types

A number of library routines use values whose types are defined in include
files. In the following list, these types are described, and the include
file defining each type is given.

Standard Type                     Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
clock_t                           The clock_t type, defined in TIME.H,
                                    stores time values. It is used by the
                                    clock function.

complex                           The complex structure, defined in
                                    MATH.H, stores the real and imaginary
                                    parts of complex numbers. It is used by
                                    the cabs function.

diskfree_t                        The diskfree_t structure, defined in
                                    DOS.H, stores disk information used by
                                    the _dos_getdiskfree routine.

diskinfo_t                        The diskinfo_t structure, defined in
                                    BIOS.H, records information about disk
                                    drives returned by the _bios_disk
                                    routine.

div_t, ldiv_t                     The div_t and ldiv_t structures, defined
                                    in STDLIB.H, store the values returned
                                    by the div and ldiv functions,
                                    respectively.

dosdate_t                         The dosdate_t structure, defined in
                                    DOS.H, records the current system date
                                    used in the _dos_getdate and
                                    _dos_setdate routines.

dostime_t                         The dostime_t structure, defined in
                                    DOS.H, records the current system time
                                    used in the _dos_gettime and
                                    _dos_settime routines.

DOSERROR                          The DOSERROR structure, defined in
                                    DOS.H, stores values returned by DOS
                                    system call 59H (available under DOS
                                    versions 3.0 and later).

exception                         The exception structure, defined in
                                    MATH.H, stores error information for
                                    math routines. It is used by the matherr
                                    routine.

FILE                              The FILE structure, defined in STDIO.H,
                                    is the structure used in all stream
                                    input and output operations. The fields
                                    of the FILE structure store information
                                    about the current state of the stream.

find_t                            The find_t structure, defined in DOS.H,
                                    stores file-attribute information
                                    returned by the _dos_findfirst and
                                    _dos_findnext routines.

fpos_t                            The fgetpos and fsetpos functions use
                                    the fpos_t object type, defined in
                                    STDIO.H, to record all the information
                                    necessary to uniquely specify every
                                    position within the file.

jmp_buf                           The jmp_buf type, defined in SETJMP.H,
                                    is an array type rather than a structure
                                    type. A buffer of this type is used by
                                    the setjmp and longjmp routines to save
                                    and restore the program
                                    environment.

lconv                             The lconv type is a structure containing
                                    formatting rules for numeric values in
                                    different countries. It is defined in
                                    LOCALE.H.

onexit_t                          The onexit routine is declared as an
                                    onexit_t pointer type, which is defined
                                    in STDLIB.H.

ptrdiff_t                         The ptrdiff_t type is used for the
                                    signed integral result of the
                                    subtraction of two pointers.

REGS                              The REGS union, defined in DOS.H, stores
                                    byte and word register values to be
                                    passed to and returned from calls to the
                                    DOS interface functions.

sig_atomic_t                      The sig_atomic_t type, defined in
                                    SIGNAL.H, is the integral type of an
                                    object that can be modified as an atomic
                                    entity, even in the presence of
                                    asynchronous interrupts. It is used in
                                    conjunction with the signal routine.

size_t                            The size_t type, defined in STDDEF.H and
                                    several other include files, is the
                                    unsigned integral result of the sizeof
                                    operator.

SREGS                             The SREGS structure, defined in DOS.H,
                                    stores the values of the ES, CS, SS, and
                                    DS registers. This structure is used by
                                    the DOS interface functions that require
                                    segment register values (int86x, intdosx
                                    , and segread).

stat                              The stat structure, defined in
                                    SYS\STAT.H, contains file-status
                                    information returned by the stat and
                                    fstat routines.

time_t                            The time_t type, defined in TIME.H,
                                    represents time values in the mktime and
                                    time routines.

timeb                             The timeb structure, defined in
                                    SYS\TIMEB.H, is used by the ftime
                                    routine to store the current system
                                    time.

tm                                The tm structure, defined in TIME.H, is
                                    used by the asctime, gmtime, and
                                    localtime functions to store and
                                    retrieve time information.

utimbuf                           The utimbuf structure, defined in
                                    SYS\UTIME.H, stores file access and
                                    modification times used by the utime
                                    function to change file-modification
                                    dates.

va_list                           The va_list array type, defined in
                                    STDARG.H, is used to hold information
                                    needed by the va_arg macro and the
                                    va_end routine. The called function
                                    declares a variable of type va_list,
                                    which may be passed as an argument to
                                    another function.






PART II  Run-Time Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The second part of this book is the reference section. It describes, in
alphabetical order, each function of the run-time library provided with the
Microsoft C Professional Development System.

Each reference entry gives syntax, return values, and other useful
information about the library functions. Information on compatibility is
supplied to assist you in writing portable programs.


About the Run-Time Reference

The following pages describe, in alphabetical order, the more than 400
functions in the Microsoft run-time library. In some cases, related routines
are clustered in the same description. For example, the based, near, and far
versions of _heapwalk are in the same discussion, as are the regular and
long double versions of the math functions, such as acos and atan.
Differences are noted where appropriate. Refer to Chapter 2, "Run-Time
Routines by Category," or to the index to locate any function that does not
appear in the expected position within the alphabetical reference.

The discussion of each function (or group of functions) is divided into the
following sections:


    ■   Description. Summarizes the routine's effect, names the include
        file(s) containing its declaration, illustrates the syntax, and
        briefly describes the arguments.

    ■   Remarks. Gives a more detailed description of the routine and how it
        is used.

    ■   Return Value. Describes the value returned by the routine.

    ■   Compatibility. Tells whether the routine is compatible with ANSI C,
        MS-DOS, OS/2, UNIX, and XENIX.

    ■   See Also. Names related routines.

    ■   Example. Gives a complete program showing the use of the routine.






abort
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Aborts the current process and returns an error code.

#include <process.h>              Required only for function declarations;
#include <stdlib.h>               use either PROCESS.H or STDLIB.H

    void abort( void );


Remarks

The abort function prints the message

    abnormal program termination

to stderr, then calls raise(SIGABRT). The action taken in response to the
SIGABRT signal depends on what action has been defined for that signal in a
prior call to the signal function. The default SIGABRT action is for the
calling process to terminate with exit code 3, returning control to the
parent process or operating system.

The abort function does not flush stream buffers or do atexit/onexit
processing.


Return Value

The abort function does not return control to the caller. Rather, it
terminates the process and, by default, returns an exit code of 3 to the
parent process.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


In multithread libraries, the abort function does not call raise(SIGABRT).
Instead, it simply terminates the process with exit code 3.


See Also

exec functions, exit, _exit, raise, signal, spawn functions


Example

    /* ABORT.C:  This tries to open a file and aborts if the attempt fails. */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {

        FILE *stream;

        if( (stream = fopen( "NOSUCHF.ILE", "r" )) == NULL )
        {
        perror( "Couldn't open file" );
        abort();
        }
        else
        fclose( stream );
    }


Output



    Couldn't open file: No such file or directory

    abnormal program termination






abs
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculates the absolute value.

#include <stdlib.h>               Required only for function declarations;
#include <math.h>                 use either STDLIB.H or MATH.H

    int abs( int n );

n                                 Integer value


Remarks

The abs function returns the absolute value of its integer argument n.


Return Value

The abs function returns the absolute value of its argument. There is no
error return.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

cabs, fabs, labs


Example

    /* ABS.C: This program computes and displays the absolute values of
    * several numbers.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        int    ix = -4, iy;
        long   lx = -41567L, ly;
        double dx = -3.141593, dy;

        iy = abs( ix );
        printf( "The absolute value of %d is %d\n", ix, iy);

        ly = labs( lx );
        printf( "The absolute value of %ld is %ld\n", lx, ly);

        dy = fabs( dx );
        printf( "The absolute value of %f is %f\n", dx, dy );
    }


Output



    The absolute value of -4 is 4
    The absolute value of -41567 is 41567
    The absolute value of -3.141593 is 3.141593





access
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Determines file-access permission.

#include <io.h>                   Required only for function declarations

#include <errno.h>                Required for definition of errno
                                    constants

    int access( char *pathname, int mode );

pathname                          File or directory path name

mode                              Permission setting


Remarks

With files, the access function determines whether the specified file exists
and can be accessed in mode. The possible mode values and their meanings in
the access call are as follows:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
00                                Check for existence only

02                                Check for write permission

04                                Check for read permission

06                                Check for read and write permission

With directories, access determines only whether the specified directory
exists; under DOS and OS/2, all directories have read and write access.


Return Value

The access function returns the value 0 if the file has the given mode. A
return value of -1 indicates that the named file does not exist or is not
accessible in the given mode, and errno is set to one of the following
values:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EACCES                            Access denied: the file's permission
                                    setting does not allow the specified
                                    access.

ENOENT                            File or path name not found.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

chmod, fstat, open, stat


Example

    /* ACCESS.C: This example uses access to check the file named "data"
    * to see if it exists and if writing is allowed.
    */

    #include <io.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        /* Check for existence */
        if( (access( "access.c", 0 )) != -1 )
        {
        printf( "File exists\n" );

        /* Check for write permission */
        if( (access( "access.c", 2 )) != -1 )
            printf( "File has write permission\n" );
        }
    }


Output



    File exists
    File has write permission





acos Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate the arccosine.

#include <math.h>

#include <errno.h>                Required for definition of errno
                                    constant

    double acos( double x );

    long double acosl( long double x );

x                                 Value whose arccosine is to be
                                    calculated


Remarks

The acos functions return the arccosine of x in the range 0 to π radians.
The value of x must be between -1 and 1. The acosl function is the 80-bit
counterpart, which uses an 80-bit, 10-byte coprocessor form of arguments and
return values. See the reference page on the long double functions for more
details on this data type.


Return Value

The acos functions return the arccosine result. If x is less than -1 or
greater than 1, the function sets errno to EDOM, prints a DOMAIN error
message to stderr, and returns 0. Error handling can be modified with the
matherr (or _matherrl) routine.


Compatibility

acos

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


acosl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

asin functions, atan functions, cos functions, matherr, sin functions, tan
functions


Example

    /* ASINCOS.C: This program prompts for a value in the range -1 to 1.
    * Input values outside this range will produce DOMAIN error messages.
    * If a valid value is entered, the program prints the arcsine and the
    * arccosine of that value.
    */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <errno.h>

    void main()
    {
        double x, y;

        printf( "Enter a real number between -1 and 1: " );
        scanf( "%lf", &x );
        y = asin( x );
        printf( "Arcsine of %f = %f\n", x, y );
        y = acos( x );
        printf( "Arccosine of %f = %f\n", x, y );
    }


Output



    Enter a real number between -1 and 1: .32696
    Arcsine of 0.326960 = 0.333085
    Arccosine of 0.326960 = 1.237711





alloca
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Allocates memory on the stack.

#include <malloc.h>               Required only for function declarations

    void *alloca( size_t size );

size                              Bytes to be allocated from stack


Remarks

The alloca routine allocates size bytes from the program's stack. The
allocated space is automatically freed when the calling function is exited.


When you compile with optimization on (either by default or by using one of
the /O options), the stack pointer may not be restored properly in functions
that have no local variables and that also reference the alloca function.
The following program demonstrates the problem:

    /* Compile with CL /Lp /AM /Ox /Fc */
    #include <malloc.h>

    void main( void )
    {
        func( 10 );
    }
    void func( register int i )
    {
        alloca( i );
    }

To ensure that the stack pointer is properly restored, make sure that any
function referencing alloca declares at least one local variable.

The pointer value returned by alloca should never be passed as an argument
to free, nor should alloca be used in an expression that is an argument to a
function.


Return Value

The alloca routine returns a void pointer to the allocated space, which is
guaranteed to be suitably aligned for storage of any type of object. To get
a pointer to a type other than char, use a type cast on the return value.
The return value is NULL if the space cannot be allocated.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

calloc functions, malloc functions, realloc functions


Example

    /* ALLOCA.C: This program checks the stack space available before
    * and after using the alloca function to allocate space on the stack.
    */

    #include <malloc.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        char *buffer;

        printf( "Bytes available on stack: %u\n", stackavail() );

        /* Allocate memory for string. */
        buffer = alloca( 120 * sizeof( char ) );
        printf( "Enter a string: " );
        gets( buffer );
        printf( "You entered: %s\n", buffer );

        printf( "Bytes available on stack: %u\n", stackavail() );
    }


Output



    Bytes available on stack: 2028
    Enter a string: How much stack space will this string take?
    You entered: How much stack space will this string take?
    Bytes available on stack: 1902





_arc Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Draw elliptical arcs.

    #include <graph.h>

    short _far _arc( short x1, short y1, short x2, short y2, short x3,
    short y3, short x4, short y4 );

    short _far _arc_w( double x1, double y1, double x2, double y2, double x3,
    double y3, double x4, double y4 );

    short _far _arc_wxy( struct _wxycoord _far *pwxy1,
    struct _wxycoord _far *pwxy2,
    struct _wxycoord _far *pwxy3, struct _wxycoord _far *pwxy4);

x1, y1                            Upper-left corner of bounding rectangle

x2, y2                            Lower-right corner of bounding rectangle

x3, y3                            Second point of start vector (center of
                                    bounding rectangle is first point)

x4, y4                            Second point of end vector (center of
                                    bounding rectangle is first point)

pwxy1                             Upper-left corner of bounding rectangle

pwxy2                             Lower-right corner of bounding rectangle

pwxy3                             Second point of start vector (center of
                                    bounding rectangle is first point)

pwxy4                             Second point of end vector (center of
                                    bounding rectangle is first point)


Remarks

The _arc functions draw elliptical arcs. The center of the arc is the center
of the bounding rectangle, which is defined by points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2)
for _arc and _arc_w and by points pwxy1 and pwxy2 for _arc_wxy. The arc
starts where it intersects an imaginary line extending from the center of
the arc through (x3, y3) for _arc and _arc_w and through pwxy3 for _arc_wxy.
It is drawn counterclockwise about the center of the arc, ending where it
intersects an imaginary line extending from the center of the arc through
(x4, y4) for _arc  and _arc_w and through pwxy4 for _arc_wxy.

The _arc routine uses the view coordinate system. The _arc_w and _arc_wxy
functions use the real-valued window coordinate system.

In each case, the arc is drawn using the current color. Since an arc does
not define a closed area, it is not filled.


Return Value

These functions return a nonzero value if the arc is successfully drawn;
otherwise, they return 0.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_ellipse functions,  _lineto functions,  _pie functions,  _rectangle
functions,  _setcolor


Example

    /* ARC.C: This program draws a simple arc. */

    #include <graph.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <conio.h>

    void main()
    {
        short x, y;
        struct xycoord xystart, xyend, xyfill;

        /* Find a valid graphics mode */
        if( !_setvideomode( _MAXRESMODE ) )
        exit( 1 );

        /* Draw arcs         */
        x = 100; y = 100;
        _arc( x - 60, y - 60, x, y, x - 30, y - 60, x - 60, y - 30 );
        _arc( x + 60, y + 60, x, y, x,      y + 30, x + 30, y );

        /* Get endpoints of second arc and enclose the figure, then fill it. */
        _getarcinfo( &xystart, &xyend, &xyfill );
        _moveto( xystart.xcoord, xystart.ycoord );
        _lineto( xyend.xcoord,   xyend.ycoord );
        _floodfill( xyfill.xcoord, xyfill.ycoord, _getcolor() );

        getch();
        _setvideomode( _DEFAULTMODE );
    }





asctime
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Converts a tm time structure to a character string.

    #include <time.h>

    char *asctime( const struct tm *timeptr );

timeptr                           Time/date structure


Remarks

The asctime function converts a time stored as a structure to a character
string. The timeptr value is usually obtained from a call to gmtime or
localtime, both of which return a pointer to a tm structure, defined in
TIME.H. (See gmtime for a complete description of the tm structure fields.)


The tm structure contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
int tm_sec                        Seconds after the minute (0 -59)

int tm_min                        Minutes after the hour (0 -59)

int tm_hour                       Hours since midnight (0 -23)

int tm_mday                       Day of the month (0 -31)

int tm_mon                        Months since January (0 -11)

int tm_year                       Years since 1900

int tm_wday                       Days since Sunday (0 - 6)

int tm_yday                       Days since January 1 (0 -365)

int tm_isdst                      Daylight-saving-time flag

The string result produced by asctime contains exactly 26 characters and has
the form of the following example:

    Wed Jan 02 02:03:55 1980\n\0

A 24-hour clock is used. All fields have a constant width. The newline
character (\n) and the null character ('\0') occupy the last two positions
of the string. The asctime function uses a single statically allocated
buffer to hold the return string. Each call to this routine destroys the
result of the previous call.


Return Value

The asctime function returns a pointer to the character string result. There
is no error return.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

ctime, ftime, gmtime, localtime, time, tzset


Example

    /* ASCTIME.C: This program places the system time in the long integer
    aclock,
    * translates it into the structure newtime and then converts it to
    * string form for output, using the asctime function.
    */

    #include <time.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    struct tm *newtime;
    time_t aclock;

    void main()
    {
        time( &aclock );                    /* Get time in seconds */

        newtime = localtime( &aclock );     /* Convert time to struct tm form
*/

        /* Print local time as a string */
        printf( "The current date and time are: %s\n", asctime( newtime ) );
    }


Output



    The current date and time are: Thu Jun 15 06:57:59 1989





asin Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate the arcsine.

    #include <math.h>

    #include <errno.h>

    double asin( double x );

    long double asinl( long double x );

x                                 Value whose arcsine is to be calculated


Remarks

The asin functions calculate the arcsine of x in the range -π/2 to π/2
radians. The value of x must be between -1 and 1. The asinl function is the
80-bit counterpart, which uses an 80-bit, 10-byte coprocessor form of
arguments and return values. See the reference page on the long double
functions for more details on this data type.


Return Value

The asin functions return the arcsine result. If x is less than -1 or
greater than 1, asin sets errno to EDOM, prints a DOMAIN error message to
stderr, and returns 0.

Error handling can be modified by using the matherr (or _matherrl) routine.



Compatibility

asin

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


asinl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

acos functions, atan functions, cos functions, matherr, sin functions, tan
functions


Example

    /* ASINCOS.C: This program prompts for a value in the range -1 to 1.
    * Input values outside this range will produce DOMAIN error messages.
    * If a valid value is entered, the program prints the arcsine and the
    * arccosine of that value.
    */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <errno.h>

    void main()
    {
        double x, y;

        printf( "Enter a real number between -1 and 1: " );
        scanf( "%lf", &x );
        y = asin( x );
        printf( "Arcsine of %f = %f\n", x, y );
        y = acos( x );
        printf( "Arccosine of %f = %f\n", x, y );
    }


Output



    Enter a real number between -1 and 1: .32696
    Arcsine of 0.326960 = 0.333085
    Arccosine of 0.326960 = 1.237711





assert
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Prints an error message and aborts the program.

#include <assert.h>

#include <stdio.h>

    void assert( int expression );

expression                        C expression specifying assertion being
                                    tested


Remarks

The assert routine prints a diagnostic message and calls the abort routine
if expression is false (0). The diagnostic message has the form

    Assertion failed: expression, file filename, line linenumber

where filename is the name of the source file and linenumber is the line
number of the assertion that failed in the source file. No action is taken
if expression is true (nonzero).

The assert routine is typically used in program development to identify
program logic errors. The given expression should be chosen so that it holds
true only if the program is operating as intended. After a program has been
debugged, the special "no debug" identifier NDEBUG can be used to remove
assert calls from the program. If NDEBUG is defined (by any value) with a /D
command-line option or with a #define directive, the C preprocessor removes
all assert calls from the program source.

The assert routine is implemented as a macro.


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

abort, raise, signal


Example

    /* ASSERT.C: In this program, the analyze_string function uses the
    * assert function to test several conditions related to string and
    * length. If any of the conditions fails, the program prints a
    * message indicating what caused the failure.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <assert.h>
    #include <string.h>

    void analyze_string( char *string );   /* Prototype */

    void main()
    {
        char  test1[] = "abc", *test2 = NULL, test3[] = "";

        printf ( "Analyzing string '%s'\n", test1 );
        analyze_string( test1 );
        printf ( "Analyzing string '%s'\n", test2 );
        analyze_string( test2 );
        printf ( "Analyzing string '%s'\n", test3 );
        analyze_string( test3 );
    }

    /* Tests a string to see if it is NULL, empty, or longer than 0 characters
*/
    void analyze_string( char * string )
    {
        assert( string != NULL );        /* Cannot be NULL */
        assert( *string != '\0' );       /* Cannot be empty */
        assert( strlen( string ) > 2 );  /* Length must be greater than 2 */
    }


Output



    Analyzing string 'abc'
    Analyzing string '(null)'
    Assertion failed: string != NULL, file assert.c, line 28

    abnormal program termination





atan Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate the arctangent of x (atan and atanl) and the arctangent of y/x
(atan2 and atan2l).

    #include <math.h>

    double atan( double x );

    double atan2( double y, double x );

    long double atanl( long double x );

    long double atan2l( long double y, long double x );

x, y                              Any number


Remarks

The atan family of functions calculates the arctangent of x, and the atan2
family of functions calculates the arctangent of y/x. The atan group returns
a value in the range -π/2 to π/2 radians, and the atan2 group returns a
value in the range -π toπ radians. The atan2 functions use the signs of both
arguments to determine the quadrant of the return value.


Return Value

The atan family of functions returns the arctangent result. If both
arguments of atan2 or atan2l are 0, the function sets errno to EDOM, prints
a DOMAIN error message to stderr, and returns 0.

Error handling can be modified by using the matherr (or _matherrl) routine.



Compatibility

atan, atan2

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


atanl, atan2l

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

acos functions, asin functions, cos functions, matherr, sin functions, tan
functions


Example

    /* ATAN.C: This program calculates the arctangent of 1 and -1. */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <errno.h>

    void main()
    {
        double x1, x2, y;

        printf( "Enter a real number: " );
        scanf( "%lf", &x1 );
        y = atan( x1 );
        printf( "Arctangent of %f: %f\n", x1, y );
        printf( "Enter a second real number: " );
        scanf( "%lf", &x2 );
        y = atan2( x1, x2 );
        printf( "Arctangent of %f / %f: %f\n", x1, x2, y );
    }


Output



    Enter a real number: -862.42
    Arctangent of -862.420000: -1.569637
    Enter a second real number: 78.5149
    Arctangent of -862.420000 / 78.514900: -1.480006





atexit
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Processes the specified function at exit.

#include <stdlib.h>               Required only for function declarations

    int atexit( void ( *func )( void ) );

func                              Function to be called


Remarks

The atexit function is passed the address of a function (func) to be called
when the program terminates normally. Successive calls to atexit create a
register of functions that are executed in LIFO (last-in-first-out) order.
No more than 32 functions can be registered with atexit or onexit. The
functions passed to atexit cannot take parameters.

All routines passed to atexit should have the _loadds attribute if used in
multithread dynamic-link libraries.


Return Value

The atexit function returns 0 if it is successful, or a nonzero value if an
error occurs (e.g., if there are already 32 exit functions defined).


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX


Use the ANSI-standard atexit function (rather than the similar onexit
function) whenever ANSI portability is desired.

In the OS/2 environment, the atexit function calls the OS/2 function
DosExitList.


See Also

abort, exit, _exit, onexit


Example

    /* ATEXIT.C: This program pushes four functions onto the stack of
    functions
    * to be executed when atexit is called. When the program exits, these
    * programs are executed on a "last in, first out" basis.
    */

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void fn1( void ), fn2( void ), fn3( void ), fn4( void );

    void main()
    {
        atexit( fn1 );
        atexit( fn2 );
        atexit( fn3 );
        atexit( fn4 );
        printf( "This is executed first.\n" );
    }

    void fn1()
    {
        printf( "next.\n" );
    }

    void fn2()
    {
        printf( "executed " );
    }

    void fn3()
    {
        printf( "is " );
    }

    void fn4()
    {
        printf( "This " );
    }


Output



    This is executed first.
    This is executed next.





atof, atoi, atol, _atold
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Convert strings to double (atof), long double (_atold) integer (atoi), or
long (atol).

#include <math.h>                 atof, _atold

#include <stdlib.h>               atof, _atold, atoi, atol

    double atof( const char *string );

    long double _atold( const char *string );

    int atoi( const char *string );

    long atol( const char *string );

string                            String to be converted


Remarks

These functions convert a character string to a double-precision
floating-point value (atof), an integer value (atoi), a long integer value
(atol), or a long double value (_atold). The input string is a sequence of
characters that can be interpreted as a numerical value of the specified
type.

The string size that can be handled by the atof or _atold function is
limited to 100 characters.

The function stops reading the input string at the first character that it
cannot recognize as part of a number. This character may be the null
character ('\0') terminating the string.

The atof and _atold functions expect string to have the following form:

    [[whitespace]] [[{sign}]] [[ IK0digits]] [[.digits]]
    [[{d| D | e | E}[[sign]digits]]

A whitespace consists of space and/or tab characters, which are ignored;
sign is either plus (+) or minus (-); and digits are one or more decimal
digits. If no digits appear before the decimal point, at least one must
appear after the decimal point. The decimal digits may be followed by an
exponent, which consists of an introductory letter (d, D, e, or E) and an
optionally signed decimal integer.

The atoi and atol functions do not recognize decimal points or exponents.
The string argument for these functions has the form

    [[whitespace]] [[sign]]digits

where whitespace, sign, and digits are exactly as described above for atof.



Return Value

Each function returns the double, long double, int, or long value produced
by interpreting the input characters as a number. The return value is 0 (for
atoi), 0L (for atol), and 0.0 (for atof and _atold) if the input cannot be
converted to a value of that type. The return value is undefined in case of
overflow.


Compatibility

atof, atoi, atol

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


_atold

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

ecvt, fcvt, gcvt


Example

    /* ATOF.C: This program shows how numbers stored as strings can be
    * converted to numeric values using the atof, atoi, and atol functions.
    */

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        char *s; double x; int i; long l;

        s = "  -2309.12E-15";    /* Test of atof */
        x = atof( s );
        printf( "atof test:  ASCII string: %s\tfloat:     %e\n", s, x );

        s = "7.8912654773d210";  /* Test of atof */
        x = atof( s );
        printf( "atof test:  ASCII string: %s\tfloat:     %e\n", s, x );

        s = "  -9885 pigs";      /* Test of atoi */
        i = atoi( s );
        printf( "atoi test:  ASCII string: %s\t\tinteger: %d\n", s, i );

        s = "98854 dollars";     /* Test of atol */
        l = atol( s );
        printf( "atol test:  ASCII string: %s\t\tlong:    %ld\n", s, l );
    }


Output



    atof test:  ASCII string:   -2309.12E-15        float:     -2.309120e-012
    atof test:  ASCII string: 7.8912654773d210      float:     7.891265e+210
    atoi test:  ASCII string:   -9885 pigs          integer: -9885
    atol test:  ASCII string: 98854 dollars         long:    98854





bdos
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Invokes the DOS system call.

#include <dos.h>

    int bdos( int dosfunc, unsigned int dosdx, unsigned int dosal );

dosfunc                           Function number

dosdx                             DX register value

dosal                             AL register value


Remarks

The bdos function invokes the DOS system call specified by dosfunc after
placing the values specified by dosdx and dosal in the DX and AL registers,
respectively. The bdos function executes an INT 21H instruction to invoke
the system call. When the system call is complete, bdos returns the contents
of the AX register.

The bdos function is intended to be used to invoke DOS system calls that
either take no arguments or take arguments only in the DX (DH, DL) and/or AL
registers.

Do not use the bdos function to call interrupts that modify the DS register.
Instead, use the intdosx or int86x function. The intdosx and int86x
functions load the DS and ES registers from the segregs parameter and also
store the DS and ES registers into segregs after the function call.

This call should not be used to invoke system calls that indicate errors by
setting the carry flag. Since C programs do not have access to this flag,
your program cannot determine whether the return value is an error code. The
intdos function should be used in these cases.


Return Value

The bdos function returns the value of the AX register after the system call
has completed.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

intdos, intdosx


Example

    /* BDOS.C: This example calls DOS function 0x9 (display string)
    * to display a $-terminated string.
    */

    #include <dos.h>

    /* Function 0x09 assumes that DS will contain segment of the string.
    * This will be true for all memory models if the string is declared near.
    */
    char _near str[] = "Hello world!\r\n$";

    void main()
    {
        /* Offset of string must be in DX, segment in DS. AL is not needed,
        * so 0 is used.
        */
        bdos( 0x09, (int)str, 0 );
    }


Output



    Hello world!





_beginthread
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Begins thread in OS/2 process.

#include <process.h>              Multithread version of PROCESS.H

#include <stddef.h>               Declaration of threadid variable

    int _far  _beginthread( void( _far *start_address )( void _far * ),
    void  _far *stack_bottom, unsigned stack_size, void  _far *arglist );

start_address                     Starting address

stack_bottom                      Address of the thread stack

stack_size                        Stack size for thread

arglist                           Argument list for thread


Remarks

The _beginthread function creates a thread that begins execution of a far
routine at start_address. When the thread returns from that far routine, it
is terminated automatically. The user can also terminate the thread by
calling _endthread.

The address of the thread stack is given by stack_bottom. If stack_bottom is
set to NULL, the run-time library code will allocate and deallocate the
thread stack as needed. Since the _beginthread function can determine the
current status of all thread IDs, it can free the old stack and allocate a
new stack whenever a thread is reused.

If it is not NULL, the stack_bottom argument must specify a word address,
and the stack must be at least as long as specified by the stack_size
argument. Usually this memory is either a global array or memory returned by
malloc or _fmalloc.

The stack_size argument must be even and nonzero.

If you are writing multithread programs that make C run-time calls from
child threads, be sure to allocate a sufficiently large stack. For example,
the C function printf requires more than 500 bytes of stack space. To be
safe, allocate at least 2,048 bytes for a thread's stack. (If your child
thread makes no run-time calls, stack space is generally not a problem.)

As a general rule, you should have 2K of stack space free when calling any
API (Applications Program Interface) routine (e.g., OS/2 system calls).

The arglist is a parameter, the size of a far pointer, to be passed to the
newly created thread. Typically it is the address of a data item, such as a
character string, to be passed to the new thread. The arglist may be NULL if
not needed, but _beginthread should be provided with some value to pass to
the child thread.

All threads will be terminated if any thread calls abort, exit, _exit, or
DosExit. A good practice in multithread programming is to make the first
thread the main thread and wait until other threads have terminated before
exiting the program.

The OS/2 function DosCreateThread should not be called directly to create
threads. The _beginthread function performs initialization procedures
required to call other C run-time library functions safely.


Return Value

The function returns the thread identification number of the new thread, if
successful. A return value of -1 indicates an error, and errno is set to one
of the following values:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EAGAIN                            Too many threads

EINVAL                            Invalid argument, "bad stack"


Compatibility

▼ ANSI  ▼ DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_endthread


Example

    /* BEGTHRD.C illustrates multiple threads using functions:
    *      _beginthread            _endthread
    *
    * Also the global variable:
    *      _threadid
    *
    * This program requires the multithread library. For example, compile
    * with the following command line:
    *      CL /MT THREADS.C
    */

    #define INCL_NOCOMMON
    #define INCL_NOPM
    #define INCL_DOSPROCESS
    #define INCL_VIO
    #include <os2.h>
    #include <process.h>    /* _beginthread, _endthread */
    #include <stddef.h>     /* _threadid                */
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <conio.h>

    void Bounce( int c );       /* Prototypes */
    void CheckKey( void *dummy );

    /* GetRandom returns a random integer between min and max. */
    #define GetRandom( min, max ) ((rand() % (int)(((max) + 1) - (min))) +
(min))

    #define STACK_SIZE   4096

    BOOL repeat = TRUE;         /* Global repeat flag and video variable */
    VIOMODEINFO vmi = { sizeof( VIOMODEINFO ) };

    void main()
    {
        PCHAR   stack;
        CHAR    ch = 'A';

        /* Get display screen's text row and column information. */
        VioGetMode( &vmi, 0 );

        /* Launch CheckKey thread to check for terminating keystroke. */
        _beginthread( CheckKey, NULL, STACK_SIZE, NULL );

        /* Loop until CheckKey terminates program. */
        while( repeat )
        {
            /* On first loops, launch character threads. */
            _beginthread( Bounce, NULL, STACK_SIZE, (void *)ch++ );

            /* Wait one second between loops. */
            DosSleep( 1000L );
        }
    }

    /* CheckKey - Thread to wait for a keystroke, then clear repeat flag. */
    void CheckKey( void *dummy )
    {
        getch();
        repeat = 0;      /* _endthread implied */
    }

    /* Bounce - Thread to create and control a colored letter that moves
    * around on the screen.
    *
    * Params: ch - the letter to be moved
    */
    void Bounce( int ch )
    {
        /* Generate letter and color attribute from thread argument. */
        char      blankcell[2] = { 0x20, 0x07 };
        char      blockcell[2] = { ch , (ch % 16) + 1 };
        int       xold, xcur, yold, ycur;
        BOOL      first = TRUE;

    /* Seed random number generator and get initial location. */
        srand( *_threadid );
        xcur = GetRandom( 0, vmi.col - 1 );
        ycur = GetRandom( 0, vmi.row - 1 );
        while( repeat )
        {
            /* Pause between loops. */
            DosSleep( 100L );

            /* Blank out our old position on the screen, and draw new letter.
*/
            if( first )
                first = FALSE;
            else
                VioWrtCellStr( blankcell, 2, yold, xold, 0 );
            VioWrtCellStr( blockcell, 2, ycur, xcur, 0 );

            /* Increment the coordinate for next placement of the block. */
            xold = xcur;
            yold = ycur;
            xcur += GetRandom( -1, 1 );
            ycur += GetRandom( -1, 1 );

            /* Correct placement (and beep) if about to go off the screen. */
            if( xcur < 0 )
                xcur = 1;
            else if( xcur == vmi.col )
                xcur = vmi.col - 2;
            else if( ycur < 0 )
                ycur = 1;
            else if( ycur == vmi.row )
                ycur = vmi.row - 2;

            /* If not at screen border, continue, otherwise beep. */
            else
                continue;
            DosBeep( (ch - 'A') * 100, 175 );
        }
        /* _endthread given (but not really needed) to terminate. */
        _endthread();
    }





Bessel Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description


Compute the Bessel function.

#include <math.h>

    double j0( double x );

    double j1( double x );

    double jn( int n, double x );

    double y0( double x );

    double y1( double x );

    double yn( int n, double x );

    long double _j0l( long double x );

    long double _jnl( int n, long double x );

    long double _j1l( long double x );

    long double _y0l( long double x );

    long double _y1l( long double x );

    long double _ynl( int n, long double x );

x                                 Floating-point value

n                                 Integer order


Remarks

The j0, j1, and jn routines return Bessel functions of the first kind─orders
0, 1, and n, respectively.

The y0, y1, and yn routines return Bessel functions of the second
kind─orders 0, 1, and n, respectively. The argument x must be positive.

The long double versions of these functions are the 80-bit counterparts and
use the 80-bit, 10-byte coprocessor form of arguments and return values. See
the reference page on the long double functions for more details on this
data type.

The Bessel functions are explained more fully in most mathematics reference
books, such as the Handbook of Mathematical Functions (Abramowitz and
Stegun; Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964). These functions
are commonly used in the mathematics of electromagnetic wave theory.


Return Value

These functions return the result of a Bessel function of x.

For y0, y1, or yn, if x is negative, the routine sets errno to EDOM, prints
a DOMAIN error message to stderr, and returns -HUGE_VAL.

Error handling can be modified by using the matherr (or _matherrl) routine.



Compatibility

j0, j1, jn, y0, y1, yn

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


_j0l,  _j1l,  _jnl,  _y0l,  _y1l,  _ynl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

matherr


Example

    /* BESSEL.C: This program illustrates Bessel functions, including:
    *      j0          j1          jn          y0          y1          yn
    */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        double x = 2.387;
        int n = 3, c;

        printf( "Bessel functions for x = %f:\n", x );
        printf( "  Kind\t\tOrder\t\Function\tResult\n\n" );
        printf( "  First\t\t0\tj0( x )\t\t%f\n", j0( x ) );
        printf( "  First\t\t1\tj1( x )\t\t%f\n", j1( x ) );
        for( c = 2; c < 5; c++ )
            printf( "  First\t\t%d\tjn( n, x )\t%f\n", c, jn( c, x ) );

        printf( "  Second\t0\ty0( x )\t\t%f\n", y0( x ) );
        printf( "  Second\t1\ty1( x )\t\t%f\n", y1( x ) );
        for( c = 2; c < 5; c++ )
            printf( "  Second\t%d\tyn( n, x )\t%f\n", c, yn( c, x ) );
    }


Output



    Bessel functions for x = 2.387000:
    Kind          Order   Function        Result

    First         0       j0( x )         0.009288
    First         1       j1( x )         0.522941
    First         2       jn( n, x )      0.428870
    First         3       jn( n, x )      0.195734
    First         4       jn( n, x )      0.063131
    Second        0       y0( x )         0.511681
    Second        1       y1( x )         0.094374
    Second        2       yn( n, x )      -0.432608
    Second        3       yn( n, x )      -0.819314
    Second        4       yn( n, x )      -1.626833





_bfreeseg
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Frees a specified based heap.

#include <malloc.h>               Required only for function declarations

    int _bfreeseg( _segment seg );

seg                               Segment selected


Remarks

The _bfreeseg function frees a based heap. The seg argument is a based heap
returned by an earlier call to _bheapseg. It specifies the based heap to be
freed.

The number of bytes freed is the number of bytes specified when the block
was allocated. After the call, the freed heap is again available for
allocation.


Return Value

The _bfreeseg function returns 0 if successful and -1 in the case of an
error.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_bheapseg, calloc functions, free functions, malloc functions, realloc
functions


Example

    /* BHEAPSEG.C: This program C illustrates dynamic allocation of based
    * memory using functions _bheapseg, _bfreeseg, _bmalloc, and _bfree.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <malloc.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <string.h>

    void main()
    {
        _segment seg;
        char _based( seg ) *outstr, _based( seg ) *instr;
        char _based( seg ) *pout,   _based( seg ) *pin;
        char tmpstr[80];
        int  len;

        printf( "Enter a string: " );
        gets( tmpstr );

        /* Request a based heap. Use based so that memory won't be taken from
        * near heap.
        */
        if( (seg = _bheapseg( 1000 )) == _NULLSEG )
            exit( 1 );

        /* Allocate based memory for two strings. */
        len = strlen( tmpstr );
        if( ((instr  = _bmalloc( seg, len + 1 )) == _NULLOFF) ||
            ((outstr = _bmalloc( seg, len + 1 )) == _NULLOFF) )
            exit( 1 );

        /* Copy a lowercased string to dynamic memory. The based memory is
        * far when addressed as a whole.
        */
        _fstrlwr( _fstrcpy( (char _far *)instr, (char _far *)tmpstr ) );

        /* Copy input string to output string in reversed order. When reading
        * and writing individual characters from a based heap, the compiler
will
        * try to process them as near, thus speeding up the processing.
        */
        for( pin = instr + len - 1, pout = outstr;
                    pout < outstr + len; pin--, pout++ )
            *pout = *pin;
        *pout = '\0';

        /* Display strings. Again strings as a whole are far. */
        printf( "Input:  %Fs\n", (char _far *)instr );
        printf( "Output: %Fs\n", (char _far *)outstr );

        /* Free blocks and release based heap. */
        _bfree( seg, instr );
        _bfree( seg, outstr );
        _bfreeseg( seg );
    }


Output



    Enter a string: Was I god
    Input:  was i god
    Output: dog i saw





_bheapseg
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Allocates a based heap.

#include <malloc.h>               Required only for function declarations

    _segment _bheapseg( size_t size );

size                              Segment size to allocate


Remarks

The _bheapseg function allocates a based-heap segment of at least size
bytes. (The block may be larger than size bytes because of space required
for alignment and for maintenance information.)

The heap code will try to enlarge the heap as necessary. If the original
block of memory is depleted (e.g., by calls to _bmalloc and _brealloc), the
run-time code will try to enlarge the heap as necessary.

The value returned by _bheapseg is the identifier of the based-heap segment.
This value should be saved and used in subsequent calls to other based-heap
functions.

The _bheapseg function can be called repeatedly. For each call, the C
library will allocate a new based-heap segment.


Return Value

The _bheapseg function returns the newly allocated segment selector that the
user must save for use in subsequent based-heap functions. A return value of
-1 indicates failure.

Always check the return from the _bheapseg function (especially when it is
used in real mode), even if the amount of memory requested is small.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

calloc functions, free functions, malloc functions, realloc functions


Example

    /* BHEAPSEG.C: This program C illustrates dynamic allocation of based
    * memory using functions _bheapseg, _bfreeseg, _bmalloc, and _bfree.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <malloc.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <string.h>

    void main()
    {
        _segment seg;
        char _based( seg ) *outstr, _based( seg ) *instr;
        char _based( seg ) *pout,   _based( seg ) *pin;
        char tmpstr[80];
        int  len;

        printf( "Enter a string: " );
        gets( tmpstr );

        /* Request a based heap. Use based so that memory won't be taken from
        * near heap.
        */
        if( (seg = _bheapseg( 1000 )) == _NULLSEG )
            exit( 1 );

        /* Allocate based memory for two strings. */
        len = strlen( tmpstr );
        if( ((instr  = _bmalloc( seg, len + 1 )) == _NULLOFF) ||
            ((outstr = _bmalloc( seg, len + 1 )) == _NULLOFF) )
            exit( 1 );

        /* Copy a lowercased string to dynamic memory. The based memory is
        * far when addressed as a whole.
        */
        _fstrlwr( _fstrcpy( (char _far *)instr, (char _far *)tmpstr ) );

        /* Copy input string to output string in reversed order. When reading
        * and writing individual characters from a based heap, the compiler
will
        * try to process them as near, thus speeding up the processing.
        */
        for( pin = instr + len - 1, pout = outstr;
                    pout < outstr + len; pin--, pout++ )
            *pout = *pin;
        *pout = '\0';

        /* Display strings. Again, strings as a whole are far. */
        printf( "Input:  %Fs\n", (char _far *)instr );
        printf( "Output: %Fs\n", (char _far *)outstr );

        /* Free blocks and release based heap. */
        _bfree( seg, instr );
        _bfree( seg, outstr );
        _bfreeseg( seg );
    }


Output



    Enter a string: Was I god
    Input:  was i god
    Output: dog i saw





_bios_disk
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calls BIOS disk services using system call INT 0x13.

#include <bios.h>

    unsigned _bios_disk( unsigned service, struct diskinfo_t  *diskinfo );

service                           Disk function desired

diskinfo                          Disk parameters


Remarks

The _bios_disk routine uses system call INT 0x13 to provide several
disk-access functions. The service parameter selects the function desired,
while the diskinfo structure provides the necessary parameters. Note that
the low-level disk operations allowed by the _bios_disk routine are very
dangerous to use because they allow direct manipulation of the disk.

The diskinfo structure provides the following parameters:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
unsigned drive                    Drive number

unsigned head                     Head number

unsigned track                    Track number

unsigned sector                   Starting sector number

unsigned nsectors                 Number of sectors to read, write, or
                                    compare

void far *buffer                  Memory location to write to, read from,
                                    or compare

The service argument can be set to one of the following manifest constants:


Constant                          Function
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_DISK_FORMAT                      Formats the track specified by diskinfo.
                                    The head and track fields indicate the
                                    track to format. Only one track can be
                                    formatted in a single call. The buffer
                                    field points to a set of sector markers.
                                    The format of the markers depends on the
                                    type of disk drive; see a technical
                                    reference to the PC BIOS to determine
                                    the marker format. There is no return
                                    value.

_DISK_READ                        Reads one or more disk sectors into
                                    memory. This service uses all fields of
                                    the structure pointed to by diskinfo, as
                                    defined earlier in this section. If no
                                    error occurs, the function returns 0 in
                                    the high-order byte and the number of
                                    sectors read in the low-order byte. If
                                    there is an error, the high-order byte
                                    will contain a set of status flags. If
                                    there is an error, the high-order byte
                                    will contain a set of status flags, as
                                    defined under _DISK_READ. Status is
                                    returned in the 8 high-order bits of the
                                    return value, as listed below:

                                    Bits          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                                    0x01**        Invalid request or a bad
                                    command

                                    0x02**        Address mark not found

                                    0x04**        Sector not found

                                    0x05**        Reset failed

                                    0x07**        Drive parameter activity
                                    failed

                                    0x09**        Direct Memory Access (DMA)
                                    overrun

                                    0x0A**        Bad sector flag detected

                                    0x10**        Data read (ECC) error

                                    0x11**        Corrected data read (ECC)
                                    error

                                    0x20**        Controller failure

                                    0x40**        Seek error

                                    0x80**        Disk timed out or failed
                                    to respond

                                    0xAA**        Drive not ready

                                    0xBB**        Undefined error

                                    0xCC**        Write fault on drive

                                    0xE0**        Status error

_DISK_RESET                       Forces the disk controller to do a hard
                                    reset, preparing for floppy-disk I/O.
                                    This is useful after an error occurs in
                                    another operation, such as a read. If
                                    this service is specified, the
                                    diskinfo argument is ignored.

_DISK_STATUS                      Obtains the status of the last disk
                                    operation. If this service is specified,
                                    the diskinfo argument is ignored.

_DISK_VERIFY                      Checks the disk to be sure the specified
                                    sectors exist and can be read. It also
                                    runs a CRC (cyclic redundancy check)
                                    test. This service uses all fields
                                    (except buffer) of the structure pointed
                                    to by diskinfo, as defined earlier in
                                    this section. If no error occurs, the
                                    function returns 0 in the high-order
                                    byte and the number of sectors compared
                                    in the low-order byte. If there is an
                                    error, the high-order byte will contain
                                    a set of status flags, as defined under
                                    _DISK_READ (above).

_DISK_WRITE                       Writes data from memory to one or more
                                    disk sectors. This service uses all
                                    fields of the structure pointed to by
                                    diskinfo, as defined earlier in this
                                    section. If no error occurs, the
                                    function returns 0 in the high-order
                                    byte and the number of sectors written
                                    in the low-order byte. If there is an
                                    error, the high-order byte will contain
                                    a set of status flags, as defined under
                                    _DISK_READ (above).


Return Value

The _bios_disk function returns the value in the AX register after the BIOS
interrupt.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* BDISK.C: This program first attempts to verify a disk by using an
    * invalid disk head number. After printing the return value error code,
    * the program verifies the disk by using a valid disk head code.
    */

    #include <conio.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <bios.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned status = 0;
        struct diskinfo_t disk_info;

        disk_info.drive    = 0;
        disk_info.head     = 10;   /* Invalid head number */
        disk_info.track    = 1;
        disk_info.sector   = 2;
        disk_info.nsectors = 8;

    printf( "Insert disk in drive A: and press any key\n" );
        getch();
        status = _bios_disk( _DISK_VERIFY, &disk_info );
        printf( "Return value: 0x%.4x\n", status );
        if( status & 0xff00 )      /* Error if high byte is 0 */
        printf( "Seek error\n" );
        else
        printf( "No seek error\n" );

        printf( "Press any key\n" );
        getch();
        disk_info.head = 0;        /* Valid head number */
        status = _bios_disk( _DISK_VERIFY, &disk_info );
        printf( "Return value: 0x%.4x\n", status );
        if( status & 0xff00 )      /* Error if high byte is 0 */
        printf( "Seek error\n" );
        else
        printf( "No seek error\n" );
    }


Output



    Insert disk in drive A: and press any key
    Return value: 0x0400
    Seek error
    Press any key
    Return value: 0x0008
    No seek error





_bios_equiplist
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calls BIOS equipment-list service, using system call INT 0x11.

#include <bios.h>

    unsigned _bios_equiplist( void );


Remarks

The _bios_equiplist routine uses system call INT 0x11 to determine what
hardware and peripherals are currently installed on the machine.


Return Value

The function returns a set of bits indicating what is installed, as defined
below:

Bits                              Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
0                                 Any disk drive installed if true

1                                 True (1) if math coprocessor installed

2 -3                              System RAM in 16K blocks (16-64K)

4 -5                              Initial video mode

6 -7                              Number of floppy-disk drives installed
                                    (00 = 1,  01 = 2, etc.)

8                                 False (0) if and only if a Direct Memory
                                    Access (DMA) chip is installed

9 -11                             Number of RS232 serial ports installed

12                                True (1) if and only if a game adapter
                                    is installed

13                                True (1) if and only if an internal
                                    modem is installed

14 -15                            Number of printers installed


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* BEQUIPLI.C: This program checks for the presence of diskettes. */

    #include <bios.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned equipment;

        equipment = _bios_equiplist();
        printf( "Equipment bits: 0x%.4x\n", equipment );
        if( equipment & 0x1000 )      /* Check for game adapter bit */
        printf( "Game adapter installed\n" );
        else
        printf( "No game adapter installed\n" );
    }


Output



    Equipment bits: 0x4061
    No game adapter installed





_bios_keybrd
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calls BIOS keyboard services, using INT 0x16.

#include <bios.h>

    unsigned _bios_keybrd( unsigned service );

service                           Keyboard function desired


Remarks

The _bios_keybrd routine uses system call INT 0x16 to access the keyboard
services. The service argument can be any of the following manifest
constants:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_KEYBRD_READ,                     Reads the next character from the
_NKEYBRD_READ                     keyboard. If no character has been
                                    typed, the call will wait for one. If
                                    the low-order byte of the return value
                                    is nonzero, the call contains the ASCII
                                    value of the character typed. The
                                    high-order byte contains the keyboard
                                    scan code for the character. The
                                    _NKEYBRD_READ constant is used with
                                    enhanced keyboards to obtain the scan
                                    codes for function keys F11 and F12 and
                                    the cursor control keys.

_KEYBRD_READY,                    Checks whether a keystroke is waiting to
_NKEYBRD_READY                    be read and, if so, reads it. The return
                                    value is 0 if no keystroke is waiting,
                                    or it is the character waiting to be
                                    read, in the same format as the
                                    _KEYBRD_READ or  _NKEYBRD_READY return.
                                    This service does not remove the waiting
                                    character from the input buffer, as does
                                    the _KEYBRD_READ or _NKEYBRD_READ
                                    service.  The _NKEYBRD_READY constant is
                                    used with enhanced keyboards to obtain
                                    the scan codes for function keys F11 and
                                    F12 and the cursor control keys.

_KEYBRD_SHIFTSTATUS,              Returns the current SHIFT-key status.
_NKEYBRD_SHIFTSTATUS              Only the low-order byte of the return
                                    value is affected. The
                                    _NKEYBRD_SHIFTSTATUS constant is used to
                                    get a full 16-bit status value. Any
                                    combination of the following bits may be
                                    set:

                                    Bit         Meaning if True
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                                    00H         Rightmost SHIFT key pressed

                                    01H         Leftmost SHIFT key pressed

                                    02H         Either CTRL key pressed

                                    3H          Either ALT key pressed

                                    04H         SCROLL LOCK on

                                    05H         NUM LOCK on

                                    06H         CAPS LOCK on

                                    07H         In insert mode (INS)

                                    08H         Left CTRL key pressed

                                    09H         Left ALT key pressed

                                    0AH         Right CTRL key pressed

                                    0BH         Right ALT key pressed

                                    0CH         SCROLL LOCK key pressed

                                    0DH         NUM LOCK key pressed

                                    0EH         CAPS LOCK key pressed

                                    0FH         SYS REQ key pressed


Return Value

With the ...READ and ...SHIFTSTATUS arguments, the _bios_keybrd function
returns the contents of the AX register after the BIOS call.

With the ...READY argument, _bios_keybrd returns 0 if there is no key. If
there is a key, _bios_keybrd returns the key waiting to be read (i.e. the
same value as _KEYBRD_READ).

With the ...READ and the ...READY arguments, the _bios_keybrd function
returns -1 if CTRL+BREAK has been pressed and is the next keystroke to be
read.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* BKEYBRD.C: This program prints a message on the screen until the
    * right SHIFT key is pressed.
    */

    #include <bios.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        while( !(_bios_keybrd( _KEYBRD_SHIFTSTATUS ) & 0001) )
        printf( "Use the right SHIFT key to stop this message\n" );
        printf( "Right SHIFT key pressed\n" );
    }


Output



    Use the right SHIFT key to stop this message
    Use the right SHIFT key to stop this message
    Use the right SHIFT key to stop this message
    Use the right SHIFT key to stop this message
    Right SHIFT key pressed





_bios_memsize
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calls the BIOS memory-size service, using system call INT 0x12.

#include <bios.h>

    unsigned _bios_memsize( void );


Remarks

The _bios_memsize routine uses system call INT 0x12 to determine the total
amount of main memory installed.


Return Value

The routine returns the total amount of installed memory in 1K blocks. The
maximum return value is 640, representing 640K of main memory.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* BMEMSIZE.C: This program displays the amount of memory installed. */

    #include <bios.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned memory;

        memory = _bios_memsize();
        printf ( "The amount of memory installed is: %dK\n", memory );
    }


Output



    The amount of memory installed is: 639K





_bios_printer
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calls BIOS printer services using system call INT 0x17.

#include <bios.h>

    unsigned _bios_printer( unsigned service, unsigned printer, unsigned data
    );

service                           Printer function desired

printer                           Target printer port

data                              Output data


Remarks

The _bios_printer routine uses system call INT 0x17 to perform printer
output services for parallel printers. The printer argument specifies the
affected printer, where 0 is LPT1, 1 is LPT2, and so forth.

Some printers do not support the full set of signals. As a result, the "Out
of Paper" condition, for example, may not be returned to your program.

The service argument can be any of the following manifest constants:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_PRINTER_INIT                     Initializes the selected printer. The
                                    data argument is ignored. The return
                                    value is the low-order status byte
                                    defined below.

_PRINTER_STATUS                   Returns the printer status in the
                                    low-order status byte defined below. The
                                    data argument is ignored.

_PRINTER_WRITE                    Sends the low-order byte of data to the
                                    printer specified by printer. The
                                    low-order byte of the return value
                                    indicates the printer status after the
                                    operation, as defined below:

                                    Bit      Meaning if True
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                                    0         Printer timed out

                                    1         Not used

                                    2         Not used

                                    3         I/O error

                                    4         Printer selected

                                    5         Out of paper

                                    6         Acknowledge

                                    7         Printer not busy




Return Value

The _bios_printer function returns the value in the AX register after the
BIOS interrupt.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* BPRINTER.C: This program checks the status of the printer attached to
    * LPT1 when it is off line, then initializes the printer.
    */

    #include <bios.h>
    #include <conio.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    #define LPT1 0

    void main()
    {
        unsigned status;

        printf ( "Place printer off line and press any key\n" );
        getch();

        status = _bios_printer( _PRINTER_STATUS, LPT1, 0 );
        printf( "Status with printer off line: 0x%.4x\n\n", status );
        printf( "Put the printer on line and then\n" );
        printf( "Press any key to initialize printer\n" );
        getch();

        status = _bios_printer( _PRINTER_INIT, LPT1, 0 );
        printf( "Status after printer initialized: 0x%.4x\n", status );
    }


Output



    Place printer off line and press any key
    Status with printer off line: 0x0018

    Put the printer on line and then
    Press any key to initialize printer
    Status after printer initialized: 0x0090





_bios_serialcom
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calls BIOS communications services, using system call INT 0x14.

#include <bios.h>

    unsigned _bios_serialcom( unsigned service, unsigned serial_port, unsigned
    data );

service                           Communications service

serial_port                       Serial port to use

data                              Port configuration bits


Remarks

The _bios_serialcom routine uses system call INT 0x14 to provide serial
communications services. The serial_port argument is set to 0 for COM1, to 1
for COM2, and so on.

The _bios_serialcom routine may not be able to establish reliable
communications at baud rates in excess of 1,200 baud ( _COM_1200) due to the
overhead associated with servicing computer interrupts. Faster data
communication rates are possible with more direct programming of serial-port
controllers. See C Programmer's Guide to Serial Communications for more
details on serial-communications programming in C.

The service argument can be set to one of the following manifest constants:


Constant                          Service
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_COM_INIT                         Sets the port to the parameters
                                    specified in the data argument

_COM_SEND                         Transmits the data characters over the
                                    selected serial port

_COM_RECEIVE                      Accepts an input character from the
                                    selected serial port

_COM_STATUS                       Returns the current status of the
                                    selected serial port

The data argument is ignored if service is set to _COM_RECEIVE or
_COM_STATUS. The data argument for _COM_INIT is created by combining (with
the OR operator) one or more of the following constants:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_COM_CHR7                         7 data bits

_COM_CHR8                         8 data bits

_COM_STOP1                        1 stop bit

_COM_STOP2                        2 stop bits

_COM_NOPARITY                     No parity

_COM_EVENPARITY                   Even parity

_COM_ODDPARITY                    Odd parity

_COM_110                          110 baud

_COM_150                          150 baud

_COM_300                          300 baud

_COM_600                          600 baud

_COM_1200                         1,200 baud

_COM_2400                         2,400 baud

_COM_4800                         4,800 baud

_COM_9600                         9,600 baud

The default value of data is 1 stop bit, no parity, and 110 baud.


Return Value

The function returns a 16-bit integer whose high-order byte contains status
bits. The meaning of the low-order byte varies, depending on the service
value. The high-order bits have the following meanings:

Bit                               Meaning if Set
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
15                                Timed out

14                                Transmission-shift register empty

13                                Transmission-hold register empty

12                                Break detected

11                                Framing error

10                                Parity error

9                                 Overrun error

8                                 Data ready

When service is _COM_SEND, bit 15 will be set if data could not be sent.

When service is _COM_RECEIVE, the byte read will be returned in the
low-order bits if the call is successful. If an error occurs, any of the
bits 9, 10, 11, or 15 will be set.

When service is _COM_INIT or _COM_STATUS, the low-order bits are defined as
follows:

Bit                               Meaning if Set
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
7                                 Receive-line signal detected

6                                 Ring indicator

5                                 Data set ready

4                                 Clear to send

3                                 Change in receive-line signal detected

2                                 Trailing-edge ring indicator

1                                 Change in data-set-ready status

0                                 Change in clear-to-send status

Note that this function works only with IBM personal computers and true
compatibles.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* BSERIALC.C: This program checks the status of serial port COM1. */

    #include <bios.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned com1_status;

        com1_status =  _bios_serialcom( _COM_STATUS, 0, 0 );
        printf ( "COM1 status: 0x%.4x\n", com1_status );
    }


Output



    COM1 status: 0x6000





_bios_timeofday
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calls BIOS time and date services, using system call INT 0x1A.

#include <bios.h>

    unsigned _bios_timeofday( unsigned service, long *timeval );

service                           Time function desired

timeval                           Clock count


Remarks

The _bios_timeofday routine uses system call INT 0x1A to get or set the
clock count. The service argument can be either of the following manifest
constants:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_TIME_GETCLOCK                    Copies the current value of the clock
                                    count to the location pointed to by
                                    timeval. If midnight has not passed
                                    since the last time the system clock was
                                    read or set, the function returns 0;
                                    otherwise, the function returns 1.

_TIME_SETCLOCK                    Sets the current value of the system
                                    clock to the value in the location
                                    pointed to by timeval. There is no
                                    return value.


Return Value

The _bios_timeofday function returns the value in the AX register after the
BIOS interrupt.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* BTIMEOFD.C: This program gets the current system clock count before and
    after
    * a "do-nothing" loop and displays the difference.
    */

    #include <bios.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        long i, begin_tick, end_tick;

        _bios_timeofday( _TIME_GETCLOCK, &begin_tick );
        printf( "Beginning tick count: %lu\n", begin_tick );
        for( i = 1; i <= 900000; i++ )
        ;
        _bios_timeofday( _TIME_GETCLOCK, &end_tick );
        printf( "Ending tick count:    %lu\n", end_tick );
        printf( "Elapsed ticks:        %lu\n", end_tick - begin_tick );
    }


Output



    Beginning tick count: 1114255
    Ending tick count:    1114287
    Elapsed ticks:        32





bsearch
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Performs binary search of a sorted array.

#include <stdlib.h>               Required for ANSI compatibility

#include <search.h>               Required only for function declarations

    void *bsearch( const void *key, const void *base, size_t num, size_t
    width,
    int ( *compare )( const void *elem1, const void *elem2 ) );

key                               Object to search for

base                              Pointer to base of search data

num                               Number of elements

width                             Width of elements

compare                           Function that compares two elements:
                                    elem1 and elem2

elem1                             Pointer to the key for the search

elem2                             Pointer to the array element to be
                                    compared with the key


Remarks

The bsearch function performs a binary search of a sorted array of num
elements, each of width bytes in size. The base value is a pointer to the
base of the array to be searched, and key is the value being sought.

The compare argument is a pointer to a user-supplied routine that compares
two array elements and returns a value specifying their relationship. The
bsearch function calls the compare routine one or more times during the
search, passing pointers to two array elements on each call. The routine
compares the elements, then returns one of the following values:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
< 0                               elem1 less than elem2

= 0                               elem1 identical to elem2

> 0                               elem1 greater than elem2

If the array you are searching is not in ascending sort order, bsearch does
not work properly. If the array contains duplicate records with identical
keys, there is no way to predict which of the duplicate records will be
located by bsearch.


Return Value

The bsearch function returns a pointer to the first occurrence of key in the
array pointed to by base. If key is not found, the function returns NULL.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

lfind, lsearch, qsort


Example

    /* BSEARCH.C: This program reads the command-line arguments, sorting them
    * with qsort, and then uses bsearch to find the word "cat."
    */

    #include <search.h>
    #include <string.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    int compare( char **arg1, char **arg2 );  /* Declare a function for
compare */

    void main( int argc, char **argv )
    {

        char **result;
        char *key = "cat";
        int i;

        /* Sort using Quicksort algorithm: */
        qsort( (char *)argv, argc, sizeof( char * ), compare );

        for( i = 0; i < argc; ++i )        /* Output sorted list */
        printf( "%s ", argv[i] );

        /*  Find the word "cat" using a binary search algorithm: */
        result = (char **)bsearch( (char *) &key, (char *)argv, argc,
                                sizeof( char * ), compare );
        if( result )
        printf( "\n%s found at %Fp\n", *result, result );
        else
        printf( "\nCat not found!\n" );
    }

    int compare( char **arg1, char **arg2 )
    {
        /* Compare all of both strings: */
        return strcmpi( *arg1, *arg2 );
    }


Output



    [C:\LIBREF] bsearch dog pig horse cat human rat cow goat
    bsearch cat cow dog goat horse human pig rat
    cat found at 0292:0FD0





cabs, cabsl
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate absolute value of a complex number.

    #include <math.h>

    double cabs( struct complex z );

    long double cabsl( struct _complexl z );

z                                 Complex number


Remarks

The cabs and cabsl functions calculate the absolute value of a complex
number, which must be a structure of type complex (or _complexl). The
structure z is composed of a real component x and an imaginary component y.
A call to one of the cabs routines is equivalent to the following:


    sqrt( z.x*z.x + z.y*z.y )

The cabsl function is the 80-bit counterpart and it uses the 80-bit, 10-byte
coprocessor form of arguments and return values. See the reference page on
the long double functions for more details on this data type.


Return Value

On overflow, these functions call matherr or _matherrl, return HUGE_VAL, and
set errno to ERANGE.


Compatibility

    cabs

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


    cabsl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

abs, fabs, labs


Example

    /* CABS.C: Using cabs, this program calculates the absolute value of
    * a complex number.
    */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        struct complex number = { 3.0, 4.0 };
        double d;

        d = cabs( number );
        printf( "The absolute value of %f + %fi is %f\n",
                number.x, number.y, d );
    }


Output



    The absolute value of 3.000000 + 4.000000i is 5.000000





calloc Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Allocate an array in memory with elements initialized to 0.

#include <stdlib.h>               For ANSI compatibility (calloc only)

#include <malloc.h>               Required only for function declarations

    void *calloc( size_t num, size_t size );

    void _based( void ) *_bcalloc( _segment seg, size_t num, size_t size );

    void _far *_fcalloc( size_t num, size_t size );

    void _near *_ncalloc( size_t num, size_t size );

num                               Number of elements

size                              Length in bytes of each element

seg                               Segment selector


Remarks

The calloc family of functions allocates storage space for an array of num
elements, each of length size bytes. Each element is initialized to 0.

In large data models (compact-, large-, and huge-model programs), calloc
maps to  _fcalloc. In small data models (tiny-, small-, and medium-model
programs), calloc maps to _ncalloc.

The various calloc functions allocate storage space in the data segments
shown in the list below:

Function                          Data Segment
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
calloc                            Depends on data model of program

_bcalloc                          Based heap, specified by seg segment
                                    selector

_fcalloc                          Far heap (outside default data segment)

_ncalloc                          Near heap (inside default data segment)


Return Value

The calloc functions return a pointer to the allocated space. The storage
space pointed to by the return value is guaranteed to be suitably aligned
for storage of any type of object. To get a pointer to a type other than
void, use a type cast on the return value.

The _fcalloc and _ncalloc functions return NULL if there is insufficient
memory available or if num or size is 0. The _bcalloc function returns
_NULLOFF in this case.


Compatibility

    calloc

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


_bcalloc, _fcalloc, _ncalloc

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

free functions, halloc, hfree, malloc functions, realloc functions


Example

    /* CALLOC.C: This program uses calloc to allocate space for 40 long
    integers.
    * It initializes each element to zero.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <malloc.h>

    void main()
    {
        long *buffer;

        buffer = (long *)calloc( 40, sizeof( long ) );
        if( buffer != NULL )
        printf( "Allocated 40 long integers\n" );
        else
        printf( "Can't allocate memory\n" );
        free( buffer );
    }


Output



    Allocated 40 long integers





ceil, ceill
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate the ceiling of a value.

    #include <math.h>

    double ceil( double x );

    long double ceill( long double x );

x                                 Floating-point value


Remarks

The ceil and ceill functions return a double (or long double) value
representing the smallest integer that is greater than or equal to x.

The ceill function is the 80-bit counterpart and it uses the 80-bit, 10-byte
coprocessor form of arguments and return values. See the reference page on
the long double functions for more details on this data type.


Return Value

These functions return the double or long double result. There is no error
return.


Compatibility

    ceil

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


    ceill

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

floor, fmod


Example

    /* FLOOR.C: This example displays the largest integers less than or equal
    * to the floating-point values 2.8 and -2.8. It then shows the smallest
    * integers greater than or equal to 2.8 and -2.8.
    */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        double y;

        y = floor( 2.8 );
        printf( "The floor of 2.8 is %f\n", y );
        y = floor( -2.8 );
        printf( "The floor of -2.8 is %f\n", y );

        y = ceil( 2.8 );
        printf( "The ceil of 2.8 is %f\n", y );
        y = ceil( -2.8 );
        printf( "The ceil of -2.8 is %f\n", y );
    }


Output



    The floor of 2.8 is 2.000000
    The floor of -2.8 is -3.000000
    The ceil of 2.8 is 3.000000
    The ceil of -2.8 is -2.000000





_cexit, _c_exit
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Perform clean-up operations and return without terminating the process.

    #include <process.h>

    void _cexit( void );

    void _c_exit( void );


Remarks

The _cexit function calls, in LIFO ("last in, first out") order, the
functions registered by atexit and onexit. Then the _cexit function flushes
all I/O buffers and closes all open files before returning.

The _c_exit function returns to the calling process without processing
atexit or onexit functions or flushing stream buffers.

The behavior of the exit, _exit, _cexit, and _c_exit functions is described
in the following list:

Function                          Action
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
exit                              Performs complete C library termination
                                    procedures, terminates the process, and
                                    exits with the supplied status code

_exit                             Performs "quick" C library termination
                                    procedures, terminates the process, and
                                    exits with the supplied status code

_cexit                            Performs complete C library termination
                                    procedures and returns to caller, but
                                    does not terminate the process

_c_exit                           Performs "quick" C library termination
                                    procedures and returns to caller, but
                                    does not terminate the process


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

abort, atexit, exec functions, exit, onexit, spawn functions, system





cgets
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets a character string from the console.

#include <conio.h>                Required only for function declarations

    char *cgets( char *buffer );

buffer                            Storage location for data


Remarks

The cgets function reads a string of characters directly from the console
and stores the string and its length in the location pointed to by buffer.
The buffer argument must be a pointer to a character array. The first
element of the array, buffer[0], must contain the maximum length (in
characters) of the string to be read. The array must contain enough elements
to hold the string, a terminating null character ('\0'), and two additional
bytes.

The cgets function continues to read characters until a
carriage-return-line-feed (CR-LF) combination is read, or the specified
number of characters is read. The string is stored starting at str[2]. If a
CR-LF combination is read, it is replaced with a null character ('\0')
before being stored. The cgets function then stores the actual length of the
string in the second array element, buffer[1].

Because all DOS editing keys are active when you call cgets, pressing F3
repeats the last entry.


Return Value

The cgets function returns a pointer to the start of the string, at
buffer[2]. There is no error return.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

getch, getche


Example

    /* CGETS.C: This program creates a buffer and initializes the first byte
    * to the size of the buffer - 2. Next, the program accepts an input
string
    * using cgets and displays the size and text of that string.
    */

    #include <conio.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        char buffer[82] = { 80 };  /* Maximum characters in first byte */
        char *result;

        printf( "Input line of text, followed by carriage return:\n");
        result = cgets( buffer );  /* Input a line of text */
        printf( "\nLine length = %d\nText = %s\n", buffer[1], result );
    }


Output



    Input line of text, followed by carriage return:
    This is some text
    Line length = 17
    Text = This is some text





_chain_intr
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Chains an interrupt from one handler to another.

    #include <dos.h>

    void _chain_intr( void( _interrupt _far *target )());

target                            Target interrupt routine


Remarks

The _chain_intr routine passes control from one interrupt handler to
another. The stack and the registers of the first routine are passed to the
second, allowing the second routine to return as if it had been called
directly.

The _chain_intr routine is generally used when a user-defined interrupt
handler begins processing, then chains to the original interrupt handler to
finish processing.

Chaining is one of two techniques, listed below, that can be used to
transfer control from a new interrupt routine to an old one:


    1.  Call _chain_intr with the interrupt routine as an argument. Do this if
        your routine is finished and you want the second interrupt routine to
        terminate the interrupt call.

        void _interrupt new_int( unsigned _es, unsigned _ds,
            unsigned _di, unsigned _si,... )
        {
            ++_di;                  /* Initial processing here  */
            _chain_intr( old_int ); /* New DI passed to old_int */
            --_di;                  /* This is never executed   */
        }


    2.  Call the interrupt routine (after casting it to an interrupt function
        if necessary). Do this if you need to do further processing after the
        second interrupt routine finishes.

        void _interrupt new_int( unsigned _es, unsigned _ds,
            unsigned _di, unsigned _si,... )
        {
            ++_di;                   /* Initial processing here  */
            (*old_int)();            /* New DI passed to old_int */
            _asm mov _di, di         /* Put real DI from old_int */
                                    /*   into _di for return    */
        }



Note that the real registers set by the old interrupt function are not
automatically set to the pseudoregisters of the new routine.

Use the _chain_intr function when you do not want to replace the default
interrupt handler, but you do need to see its input. An example is a TSR
(terminate-and-stay-resident) program that checks all keyboard input for a
particular "hot key" sequence.

The _chain_intr function should be used only with C functions that have been
declared with type _interrupt. The _interrupt declaration ensures that the
procedure's entry/exit sequence is appropriate for an interrupt handler.


Return Value

The _chain_intr function does not return to the caller.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_getvect,  _dos_keep,  _dos_setvect





chdir
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Changes the current working directory.

#include <direct.h>               Required only for function declarations

#include <errno.h>                Required for errno constants

    int chdir( char *dirname );

dirname                           Path name of new working directory


Remarks

The chdir function changes the current working directory to the directory
specified by  dirname. The dirname argument must refer to an existing
directory.

This function can change the current working directory on any drive; it
cannot be used to change the default drive itself. For example, if A: is the
default drive and \BIN is the current working directory, the following call
changes the current working directory for drive C:

    chdir("c:\\temp");

Notice that you must place two backslashes ( \\ ) in a C string in order to
represent a single backslash ( \ ); the backslash is the escape character
for C strings and therefore requires special handling.

This function call has no apparent immediate effect. However, when the
_chdrive function is called to change the default drive to C:, the current
working directory becomes C:\TEMP.

In OS/2 protected mode, the current working directory is local to a process
rather than system-wide. When a process terminates, the current working
directory is restored to its original value. Under DOS, the new directory
set by the program becomes the new current working directory.


Return Value

The chdir function returns a value of 0 if the working directory is
successfully changed. A return value of -1 indicates an error, in which case
errno is set to ENOENT, indicating that the specified path name could not be
found.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

_dos_setdrive, mkdir, rmdir, system


Example

    /* CHGDIR.C: This program uses the chdir function to verify that a
    * given directory exists. Under real mode that directory also becomes
    * the current directory. Under protected mode, it is only the default
    * directory for the current process.
    */

    #include <direct.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main( int argc, char *argv[] )
    {
        if( chdir( argv[1] )   )
        printf( "Unable to locate the directory: %s\n", argv[1] );
        else
        system( "dir *.c" );
    }


Output



    [C:\LIBREF] chgdir \tmp

    The volume label in drive C is OS2.
    Directory of C:\TMP

    DUP      C        232   4-18-89  11:18a
    TEST     C        713   4-07-88   2:49p
        2 File(s)   14155776 bytes free





_chdrive
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Changes the current working drive.

#include <direct.h>               Required only for function declarations

    int _chdrive( int drive );

drive                             Number of new working drive


Remarks

The _chdrive function changes the current working drive to the drive
specified by drive. The drive argument uses an integer to specify the new
working drive (1=A, 2=B, etc.).

This function changes only the working drive; the chdir function changes the
working directory.

In OS/2 protected mode, the working drive is local to a process rather than
system-wide. When a process terminates, the working drive is restored to its
original value. Under DOS, the new drive set by the program becomes the new
working drive.


Return Value

The _chdrive function returns a value of 0 if the working drive is
successfully changed. A return value of -1 indicates an error.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

chdir,  _dos_setdrive,  _fullpath,  _getcwd,  _getdrive, mkdir, rmdir,
system


Example

    /* GETDRIVE.C illustrates drive functions including:
    *      _getdrive       _chdrive        _getdcwd
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <conio.h>
    #include <direct.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        int ch, drive, curdrive;
        static char path[_MAX_PATH];

        /* Save current drive. */
        curdrive = _getdrive();

        printf( "Available drives are: \n" );

        /* If we can switch to the drive, it exists. */
        for( drive = 1; drive <= 26; drive++ )
        if( !_chdrive( drive ) )
            printf( "%c: ", drive + 'A' - 1 );

        while( 1 )
        {
        printf( "\nType drive letter to check or ESC to quit: " );
        ch = getch();
        if( ch == 27 )
            break;
        if( isalpha( ch ) )
            putch( ch );
        if( _getdcwd( toupper( ch ) - 'A' + 1, path, _MAX_PATH ) != NULL )
            printf( "\nCurrent directory on that drive is %s\n", path );
        }

        /* Restore original drive. This is only necessary for DOS. Under OS/2
        * the current drive of the calling process is always restored.
        */
        _chdrive( curdrive );
        printf( "\n" );
    }


Output



    Available drives are:
    A: B: C:
    Type drive letter to check or ESC to quit: q
    Type drive letter to check or ESC to quit: a
    Current directory on that drive is A:\

    Type drive letter to check or ESC to quit: c
    Current directory on that drive is C:\LIBREF

    Type drive letter to check or ESC to quit:





chmod
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Changes the file-permission settings.

#include <sys\types.h>

#include <sys\stat.h>

#include <errno.h>

#include <io.h>                   Required only for function declarations

    int chmod( char *filename, int pmode );

filename                          Path name of existing file

pmode                             Permission setting for file


Remarks

The chmod function changes the permission setting of the file specified by
filename. The permission setting controls read and write access to the file.
The constant expression pmode contains one or both of the manifest constants
S_IWRITE and S_IREAD, defined in SYS\STAT.H. Any other values for pmode are
ignored. When both constants are given, they are joined with the bitwise-OR
operator ( | ). The meaning of the pmode argument is as follows:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
S_IWRITE                          Writing permitted

S_IREAD                           Reading permitted

S_IREAD |  S_IWRITE               Reading and writing permitted

If write permission is not given, the file is read-only. Under DOS and OS/2,
all files are readable; it is not possible to give write-only permission.
Thus the modes S_IWRITE and S_IREAD  |  S_IWRITE are equivalent.


Return Value

The chmod function returns the value 0 if the permission setting is
successfully changed. A return value of -1 indicates an error; in this case,
errno is set to ENOENT, indicating that the specified file could not be
found.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

access, creat, fstat, open, stat


Example

    /* CHMOD.C: This program uses chmod to change the mode of a file to
    * read-only. It then attempts to modify the file.
    */

    #include <sys\types.h>
    #include <sys\stat.h>
    #include <io.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        /* Make file read-only: */
        if( chmod( "CHMOD.C", S_IREAD ) == -1 )
        perror( "File not found\n" );
        else
        printf( "Mode changed to read-only\n" );
        system( "echo /* End of file */ >> CHMOD.C" );

        /* Change back to read/write: */
        if( chmod( "CHMOD.C", S_IWRITE ) == -1 )
        perror( "File not found\n" );
        else
        printf( "Mode changed to read/write\n" );
    }


Output



    Mode changed to read-only
    Access denied
    Mode changed to read/write





chsize
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Changes the file size.

#include <io.h>                   Required only for function declarations

#include <errno.h>

    int chsize( int handle, long size );

handle                            Handle referring to open file

size                              New length of file in bytes


Remarks

The chsize function extends or truncates the file associated with handle to
the length specified by size. The file must be open in a mode that permits
writing. Null characters ('\0') are appended if the file is extended. If the
file is truncated, all data from the end of the shortened file to the
original length of the file is lost.

In DOS, the directory update is done when a file is closed. Consequently,
while a program is running, requests to determine the amount of free disk
space may receive inaccurate results.


Return Value

The chsize function returns the value 0 if the file size is successfully
changed. A return value of -1 indicates an error, and errno is set to one of
the following values:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EACCES                            Specified file is locked against access
                                    (OS/2 and DOS versions 3.0 and later
                                    only).

EBADF                             Specified file is read-only or an
                                    invalid file handle.

ENOSPC                            No space is left on device.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

close, creat, open


Example

    /* CHSIZE.C: This program uses filelength to report the size of a
    * file before and after modifying it with chsize.
    */

    #include <io.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <sys\types.h>
    #include <sys\stat.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int fh, result;
        unsigned int nbytes = BUFSIZ;

        /* Open a file */
        if( (fh = open( "data", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, S_IREAD | S_IWRITE )) != -1 )
        {
        printf( "File length before: %ld\n", filelength( fh ) );
        if( chsize( fh, 329678 ) == 0 )
            printf( "Size successfully changed\n" );
        else
            printf( "Problem in changing the size\n" );
        printf( "File length after:  %ld\n", filelength( fh ) );
        close( fh );
        }
    }


Output



    File length before: 0
    Size successfully changed
    File length after:  329678





_clear87
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets and clears the floating-point status word.

    #include <float.h>

    unsigned int _clear87( void );


Remarks

The _clear87 function gets and clears the floating-point status word. The
floating-point status word is a combination of the 8087/80287 status word
and other conditions detected by the 8087/80287 exception handler, such as
floating-point stack overflow and underflow.


Return Value

The bits in the value returned indicate the floating-point status. See the
FLOAT.H include file for a complete definition of the bits returned by
_clear87.

Many of the math library functions modify the 8087/80287 status word, with
unpredictable results. Return values from _clear87 and _status87 become more
reliable as fewer floating-point operations are performed between known
states of the floating-point status word.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_control87, _status87


Example

    /* CLEAR87.C: This program creates various floating-point problems,
    * then uses _clear87 to report on these problems.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <float.h>

    void main()
    {
        double a = 1e-40, b;
        float x, y;

        printf( "Status: %.4x - clear\n", _clear87()  );

        /* Store into y is inexact and underflows: */
        y = a;
        printf( "Status: %.4x - inexact, underflow\n", _clear87() );

    /* y is denormal: */
        b = y;
        printf( "Status: %.4x - denormal\n", _clear87() );
    }


Output



    Status: 0000 - clear
    Status: 0030 - inexact, underflow
    Status: 0002 - denormal





clearerr
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Resets the error indicator for a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    void clearerr( FILE *stream );

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The clearerr function resets the error indicator and end-of-file indicator
for stream. Error indicators are not automatically cleared; once the error
indicator for a specified stream is set, operations on that stream continue
to return an error value until clearerr, fseek, fsetpos, or rewind is
called.


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

eof, feof, ferror, perror


Example

    /* CLEARERR.C: This program creates an error on the standard input
    * stream, then clears it so that future reads won't fail.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int c;

        /* Create an error by writing to standard input. */
        putc( 'c', stdin );
        if( ferror( stdin ) )
        {
        perror( "Write error" );
        clearerr( stdin );
        }

    /* See if read causes an error. */
        printf( "Will input cause an error? " );
        c = getc( stdin );
        if( ferror( stdin ) )
        {
        perror( "Read error" );
        clearerr( stdin );
        }
    }


Output



    Write error: Error 0
    Will input cause an error? n





_clearscreen
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Clears the specified area of the screen.

    #include <graph.h>

    void _far _clearscreen( short area );

area                              Target area


Remarks

The _clearscreen function erases the target area, filling it with the
current background color. The area parameter can be one of the following
manifest constants (defined in GRAPH.H):

Constant                          Action
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_GCLEARSCREEN                     Clears and fills the entire screen

_GVIEWPORT                        Clears and fills only within the current
                                    view port

_GWINDOW                          Clears and fills only within the current
                                    text window


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_getbkcolor,  _setbkcolor


Example

    /* CLRSCRN.C */
    #include <conio.h>
    #include <graph.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        short xhalf, yhalf, xquar, yquar;
        struct videoconfig vc;

    /* Find a valid graphics mode. */
        if( !_setvideomode( _MAXRESMODE ) )
        exit( 1 );

        _getvideoconfig( &vc );

        xhalf = vc.numxpixels / 2;
        yhalf = vc.numypixels / 2;
        xquar = xhalf / 2;
        yquar = yhalf / 2;

        _setviewport( 0, 0, xhalf - 1, yhalf - 1 );
        _rectangle( _GBORDER, 0,  0, xhalf - 1, yhalf - 1 );
        _ellipse( _GFILLINTERIOR, xquar / 4, yquar / 4,
                            xhalf - (xquar / 4), yhalf - (yquar / 4) );
        getch();
        _clearscreen( _GVIEWPORT );

        getch();
        _setvideomode( _DEFAULTMODE );
    }





clock
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculates the time used by the calling process.

    #include <time.h>

    clock_t clock( void );


Remarks

The clock function tells how much processor time has been used by the
calling process. The time in seconds is approximated by dividing the clock
return value by the value of the CLOCKS_PER_SEC constant.

In other words, the clock function returns the number of processor timer
ticks that have elapsed. A timer tick is approximately equal to
1/CLOCKS_PER_SEC seconds.


Return Value

The clock function returns the product of the time in seconds and the value
of the CLOCKS_PER_SEC constant. If the processor time is not available, the
function returns the value -1, cast as clock_t.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX


In both DOS and OS/2, clock returns the time elapsed since the process
started. This may not be equal to the actual processor time used by the
process.

In previous versions of Microsoft C, the CLOCKS_PER_SEC constant was called
CLK_TCK.


See Also

difftime, time


Example

    /* CLOCK.C: This example prompts for how long the program is to run and
    * then continuously displays the elapsed time for that period.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <time.h>

    void sleep( clock_t wait );

    void main()
    {
        long    i = 600000L;
        clock_t start, finish;
        double  duration;

        /* Delay for a specified time. */
        printf( "Delay for three seconds\n" );
        sleep( (clock_t)3 * CLOCKS_PER_SEC );
        printf( "Done!\n" );

        /* Measure the duration of an event. */
        printf( "Time to do %ld empty loops is ", i );
        start = clock();
        while( i-- )
        ;
        finish = clock();
        duration = (double)(finish - start) / CLOCKS_PER_SEC;
        printf( "%2.1f seconds\n", duration );
    }

    /* Pauses for a specified number of microseconds. */
    void sleep( clock_t wait )
    {
        clock_t goal;

        goal = wait + clock();
        while( goal > clock() )
            ;
    }


Output



    Delay for five seconds
    Done!
    Time to do 900000 empty loops is 2.0 seconds





close
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Closes a file.

#include <io.h>                   Required only for function declarations

#include <errno.h>

    int close( int handle );

handle                            Handle referring to open file


Remarks

The close function closes the file associated with handle.


Return Value

The close function returns 0 if the file was successfully closed. A return
value of -1 indicates an error, and errno is set to EBADF, indicating an
invalid file-handle argument.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

chsize, creat, dup, dup2, open, unlink


Example

    /* OPEN.C: This program uses open to open a file named OPEN.C for input
    * and a file named OPEN.OUT for output. The files are then closed.
    */

    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <sys\types.h>
    #include <sys\stat.h>
    #include <io.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int fh1, fh2;
        fh1 = open( "OPEN.C", O_RDONLY );
        if( fh1 == -1 )
        perror( "open failed on input file" );
        else
        {
        printf( "open succeeded on input file\n" );
        close( fh1 );
        }

    fh2 = open( "OPEN.OUT", O_WRONLY | O_CREAT, S_IREAD | S_IWRITE );
        if( fh2 == -1 )
        perror( "open failed on output file" );
        else
        {
        printf( "open succeeded on output file\n" );
        close( fh2 );
        }
    }


Output



    open succeeded on input file
    open succeeded on output file





_control87
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets and sets the floating-point control word.

    #include <float.h>

    unsigned int _control87( unsigned int new, unsigned int mask );

new                               New control-word bit values

mask                              Mask for new control-word bits to set


Remarks

The _control87 function gets and sets the floating-point control word. The
floating-point control word allows the program to change the precision,
rounding, and infinity modes in the floating-point-math package.
Floating-point exceptions can also be masked or unmasked using the
_control87 function.

If the value for mask is equal to 0, then _control87 gets the floating-point
control word. If mask is nonzero, then a new value for the control word is
set in the following manner: for any bit that is on (equal to 1) in mask,
the corresponding bit in new is used to update the control word. To put it
another way,

    fpcntrl = ((fpcntrl & ~mask) | (new & mask))

where  fpcntrl  is the floating-point control word.

The possible values for the mask constant (mask) and new control values
(new) are shown in Table R.1.

Table   R.1 Hex Values

╓┌────────────┌──────────┌────────────────┌──────────────────────────────────╖
Mask         Hex Value  Constant         Hex Value
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
MCW_EM       0x003F
(Interrupt
exception)

                        EM_INVALID       0x0001

                        EM_DENORMAL      0x0002

                        EM_ZERODIVIDE    0x0004

                        EM_OVERFLOW      0x0008

                        EM_UNDERFLOW     0x0010

                        EM_INEXACT       0x0020



MCW_IC       0x1000
Mask         Hex Value  Constant         Hex Value
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
MCW_IC       0x1000
(Infinity
control)

                        IC_AFFINE        0x1000

                        IC_PROJECTIVE    0x0000



MCW_RC       0x0C00
(Rounding
control)

                        RC_CHOP          0x0C00

                        RC_UP            0x0800

                        RC_DOWN          0x0400
Mask         Hex Value  Constant         Hex Value
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                        RC_DOWN          0x0400

                        RC_NEAR          0x0000



MCW_PC       0x0300
(Precision
control)

                        PC_24 (24 bits)  0x0000

                        PC_53 (53 bits)  0x0200

                        PC_64 (64 bits)  0x0300

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────




Return Value

The bits in the value returned indicate the floating-point control state.
See the FLOAT.H include file for a complete definition of the bits returned
by _control87.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_clear87,  _status87


Example

    /* CNTRL87.C: This program uses _control87 to output the control word,
    * set the precision to 24 bits, and reset the status to the default.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <float.h>

    void main()
    {
        double a = 0.1;

        /* Show original control word and do calculation. */
        printf( "Original: 0x%.4x\n", _control87( 0, 0 ) );
        printf( "%1.1f * %1.1f = %.15e\n", a, a, a * a );

        /* Set precision to 24 bits and recalculate. */
        printf( "24-bit:   0x%.4x\n", _control87( PC_24, MCW_PC ) );
        printf( "%1.1f * %1.1f = %.15e\n", a, a, a * a );

        /* Restore to default and recalculate. */
        printf( "Default:  0x%.4x\n", _control87( CW_DEFAULT, 0xffff ) );
        printf( "%1.1f * %1.1f = %.15e\n", a, a, a * a );
    }


Output



    Original: 0x1332
    0.1 * 0.1 = 1.000000000000000e-002
    24-bit:   0x1332
    0.1 * 0.1 = 9.999999776482582e-003
    Default:  0x1032
    0.1 * 0.1 = 1.000000000000000e-002





cos Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate the cosine (cos and cosl) or hyperbolic cosine (cosh and coshl).

    #include <math.h>

    double cos( double x );

    double cosh( double x );

    long double cosl( long double x );

    long double coshl( long double x );

x                                 Angle in radians


Remarks

The cos and cosh functions return the cosine and hyperbolic cosine,
respectively, of x.

The cosl and coshl functions are the 80-bit counterparts and use the 80-bit,
10-byte coprocessor form of arguments and return values. See the reference
page on the long double functions for more details on this data type.


Return Value

If x is large, a partial loss of significance in the result may occur in a
call to cos, in which case the function generates a PLOSS error. If x is so
large that significance is completely lost, cos prints a TLOSS message to
stderr and returns 0. In both cases, errno is set to ERANGE.

If the result is too large in a cosh call, the function returns HUGE_VAL and
sets errno to ERANGE.


Compatibility

cos, cosh

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


cosl, coshl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

acos functions, asin functions, atan functions, matherr, sin functions, tan
functions


Example

    /* SINCOS.C: This program displays the sine, hyperbolic sine, cosine,
    * and hyperbolic cosine of pi / 2.
    */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        double pi = 3.1415926535;
        double x, y;

        x = pi / 2;
        y = sin( x );
        printf( "sin( %f ) = %f\n", x, y );
        y = sinh( x );
        printf( "sinh( %f ) = %f\n",x, y );
        y = cos( x );
        printf( "cos( %f ) = %f\n", x, y );
        y = cosh( x );
        printf( "cosh( %f ) = %f\n",x, y );
    }


Output



    sin( 1.570796 ) = 1.000000
    sinh( 1.570796 ) = 2.301299
    cos( 1.570796 ) = 0.000000
    cosh( 1.570796 ) = 2.509178





cprintf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Formats and prints to the console.

#include <conio.h>                Required only for function declarations

    int cprintf( char *format [[, argument]] ... );

format                            Format control string

argument                          Optional arguments


Remarks

The cprintf function formats and prints a series of characters and values
directly to the console, using the putch function to output characters. Each
argument (if any) is converted and output according to the corresponding
format specification in format. The format has the same form and function as
the format argument for the printf function; see printf for a description of
the format and arguments.

Note that unlike the fprintf, printf, and sprintf functions, cprintf does
not translate line-feed characters into carriage-return-line-feed
combinations on output.


Return Value

The cprintf function returns the number of characters printed.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

cscanf, fprintf, printf, sprintf, vprintf


Example

    /* CPRINTF.C: This program displays some variables to the console. */

    #include <conio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int      i = -16, h = 29;
        unsigned u = 62511;
        char     c = 'A';
        char     s[] = "Test";

    /* Note that console output does not translate \n as
        * standard output does. Use \r\n instead.
        */
        cprintf( "%d  %.4x  %u  %c %s\r\n", i, h, u, c, s );

    }


Output



    -16  001d  62511  A Test





cputs
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Puts a string to the console.

#include <conio.h>                Required only for function declarations

    int cputs( char *string );

string                            Output string


Remarks

The cputs function writes the null-terminated string pointed to by string
directly to the console. Note that a carriage-return-line-feed (CR-LF)
combination is not automatically appended to the string.


Return Value

If successful, cputs returns a 0. If the function fails, it returns a
nonzero value.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

putch


Example

    /* CPUTS.C: This program first displays a string to the console. */

    #include <conio.h>

    void main()
    {
        /* String to print at console. Note the \r (return) character. */
        char *buffer = "Hello world (courtesy of cputs)!\r\n";

        cputs( buffer );
    }


Output



    Hello world (courtesy of cputs)!





creat
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Creates a new file.

#include <sys\types.h>

#include <sys\stat.h>

#include <errno.h>

#include <io.h>                   Required only for function declarations

    int creat( char *filename, int pmode );

filename                          Path name of new file

pmode                             Permission setting


Remarks

The creat function either creates a new file or opens and truncates an
existing file. If the file specified by filename does not exist, a new file
is created with the given permission setting and is opened for writing. If
the file already exists and its permission setting allows writing, creat
truncates the file to length 0, destroying the previous contents, and opens
it for writing.

The permission setting, pmode, applies to newly created files only. The new
file receives the specified permission setting after it is closed for the
first time. The integer expression pmode contains one or both of the
manifest constants S_IWRITE and S_IREAD, defined in SYS\STAT.H. When both of
the constants are given, they are joined with the bitwise-OR operator ( | ).
The pmode argument is set to one of the following values:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
S_IWRITE                          Writing permitted

S_IREAD                           Reading permitted

S_IREAD | S_IWRITE                Reading and writing permitted

If write permission is not given, the file is read-only. Under DOS and OS/2,
it is not possible to give write-only permission. Thus, the S_IWRITE and
S_IREAD | S_IWRITE modes are equivalent. Under DOS versions 3.0 and later,
files opened using creat are always opened in compatibility mode (see
sopen).

The creat function applies the current file-permission mask to pmode before
setting the permissions (see umask).

Note that the creat routine is provided primarily for compatibility with
previous libraries. A call to open with O_CREAT and O_TRUNC in the oflag
argument is equivalent to creat and is preferable for new code.


Return Value

If successful, creat returns a handle for the created file. Otherwise, it
returns -1 and sets errno to one of the following constants:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EACCES                            Path name specifies an existing
                                    read-only file or specifies a directory
                                    instead of a file

EMFILE                            No more handles available (too many open
                                    files)

ENOENT                            Path name not found


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

chmod, chsize, close, dup, dup2, open, sopen, umask


Example

    /* CREAT.C: This program uses creat to create the file (or truncate the
    * existing file) named data and open it for writing.
    */

    #include <sys\types.h>
    #include <sys\stat.h>
    #include <io.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        int fh;

        fh = creat( "data", S_IREAD | S_IWRITE );
        if( fh == -1 )
        perror( "Couldn't create data file" );
        else
        {
        printf( "Created data file.\n" );
        close( fh );
        }
    }


Output



    Created data file.





cscanf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Reads formatted data from the console.

#include <conio.h>                Required only for function declarations

    int cscanf( char *format [[, argument]] ... );

format                            Format-control string

argument                          Optional arguments


Remarks

The cscanf function reads data directly from the console into the locations
given by argument. The getche function is used to read characters. Each
optional argument must be a pointer to a variable with a type that
corresponds to a type specifier in format. The format controls the
interpretation of the input fields and has the same form and function as the
format argument for the scanf function; see scanf for a description of
format.

While cscanf normally echoes the input character, it will not do so if the
last call was to ungetch.


Return Value

The cscanf function returns the number of fields that were successfully
converted and assigned. The return value does not include fields that were
read but not assigned.

The return value is EOF for an attempt to read at end-of-file. This may
occur when keyboard input is redirected at the operating system command-line
level. A return value of 0 means that no fields were assigned.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

cprintf, fscanf, scanf, sscanf


Example

    /* CSCANF.C: This program prompts for a string and uses cscanf to read
    * in the response. Then cscanf returns the number of items matched,
    * and the program displays that number.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <conio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int   result, i[3];

        cprintf( "Enter three integers: ");
        result = cscanf( "%i %i %i", &i[0], &i[1], &i[2] );
        cprintf( "\r\nYou entered " );
        while( result-- )
        cprintf( "%i ", i[result] );
        cprintf( "\r\n" );

    }


Output



    Enter three integers: 34 43 987k
    You entered 987 43 34





ctime
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Converts a time stored as a time_t value to a character string.

#include <time.h>                 Required only for function declarations

    char *ctime( const time_t *timer );

timer                             Pointer to stored time


Remarks

The ctime function converts a time stored as a time_t value to a character
string. The timer value is usually obtained from a call to time, which
returns the number of seconds elapsed since 00:00:00 Greenwich mean time,
January 1, 1970.

The string result produced by ctime contains exactly 26 characters and has
the form of the following example:

    Wed Jan 02 02:03:55 1980\n\0

A 24-hour clock is used. All fields have a constant width. The newline
character (\n) and the null character ('\0') occupy the last two positions
of the string.

Calls to the ctime function modify the single statically allocated buffer
used by the gmtime and the localtime functions. Each call to one of these
routines destroys the result of the previous call. The ctime function also
shares a static buffer with the asctime function. Thus, a call to ctime
destroys the results of any previous call to asctime, localtime, or gmtime.



Return Value

The ctime function returns a pointer to the character string result. If time
represents a date before 1980, ctime returns NULL.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

asctime, ftime, gmtime, localtime, time


Example

    /* ASCTIME.C: This program places the system time in the long integer
    aclock,
    * translates it into the structure newtime and then converts it to
    * string form for output, using the asctime function.
    */

    #include <time.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    struct tm *newtime;
    time_t aclock;

    void main()
    {
        time( &aclock );                    /* Get time in seconds. */

        newtime = localtime( &aclock );     /* Convert time to struct tm form.
*/

        /* Print local time as a string. */
        printf( "The current date and time are: %s\n", asctime( newtime ) );
    }


Output



    The current date and time are: Thu Jun 15 06:57:59 1989





cwait
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Waits until the child process terminates.

    #include <process.h>

    int cwait( int *termstat, int procid, int action );

termstat                          Address for termination status code

procid                            Process ID of child

action                            Action code


Remarks

The cwait function suspends the calling process until the specified child
process terminates.

If not NULL, termstat points to a buffer where cwait will place the
termination-status word and the return code of the terminated child process.


The termination-status word indicates whether or not the child process
terminated normally by calling the OS/2 DosExit function. (Programs that
terminate with exit or by "falling off the end of main" use DosExit
internally.) If the process did terminate normally, the low-order and
high-order bytes of the termination-status word are as follows:

Byte                              Contents
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
High order                        Contains the low-order byte of the
                                    result code that the child code passed
                                    to DosExit. The DosExit function is
                                    called if the child process called exit
                                    or _exit, returned from main, or reached
                                    the end of main. The low-order byte of
                                    the result code is either the low-order
                                    byte of the argument to _exit or exit,
                                    the low-order byte of the return value
                                    from main, or a random value if the
                                    child process reached the end of main.

Low order                         0 (normal termination).

If the child process terminates without calling DosExit, the high-order and
low-order bytes of the termination-status word are as follows:

Byte                              Contents
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
High order                        0

Low order                         Termination code from DosCWait:

                                    Code        Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                                    1           Hard-error abort

                                    2           Trap operation

                                    3           SIGTERM signal not
                                                intercepted

The procid argument specifies which child-process termination to wait for.
This value is returned by the call to the spawn function that started the
child process. If the specified child process terminates before cwait is
called, the function returns immediately.

The action argument specifies when the parent process resumes execution, as
shown in the following list:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
WAIT_CHILD                        The parent process waits until the
                                    specified child process has ended.

WAIT_GRANDCHILD                   The parent process waits until the
                                    specified child process and all child
                                    processes of that child process have
                                    ended.

The WAIT_CHILD and WAIT_GRANDCHILD action codes are defined in PROCESS.H.


Return Value

If the cwait function returns after normal termination of the child process,
it returns the child's process ID.

If the cwait function returns after abnormal termination of the child
process, it returns -1 and sets errno to EINTR.

Otherwise, the cwait function returns -1 immediately and sets errno to one
of the following error codes:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
ECHILD                            No child process exists, or invalid
                                    process ID

EINVAL                            Invalid action code


Compatibility

▼ ANSI  ▼ DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX


Note that the OS/2 DosExit function allows programs to return a 16-bit
result code. However, the wait and cwait functions return only the low-order
byte of that result code.


See Also

exit, _exit, spawn functions, wait


Example

    /* CWAIT.C: This program launches several child processes and waits
    * for a specified process to finish.
    */

    #define INCL_NOPM
    #define INCL_NOCOMMON
    #define INCL_DOSPROCESS
    #include <os2.h>        /* DosSleep */
    #include <process.h>    /* cwait    */
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <time.h>

    /* Macro to get a random integer within a specified range */
    #define getrandom( min, max ) ((rand() % (int)(((max) + 1) - (min))) +
(min))

    struct  CHILD
    {
        int     pid;
        char    name[10];
    } child[4] = { { 0, "Ann" }, { 0, "Beth"  }, { 0, "Carl" }, { 0, "Dave" }
};

    void main( int argc, char *argv[] )
    {
        int     termstat, pid, c, tmp;

        srand( (unsigned)time( NULL ) );               /* Seed randomizer */
        /* If no arguments, this is the parent. */
        if( argc == 1 )
        {
            /* Spawn children in numeric order. */
            for( c = 0; c < 4; c++ )
                child[c].pid = spawnl( P_NOWAIT, argv[0], argv[0],
                                        child[c].name, NULL );

    /* Wait for randomly specified child, and respond when done. */
            c = getrandom( 0, 3 );
            printf( "Come here, %s\n", child[c].name );
            cwait( &termstat, child[c].pid, WAIT_CHILD );
            printf( "Thank you, %s\n", child[c].name );
        }

        /* If there are arguments, this must be a child. */
        else
        {
            /* Delay for a period determined by process number. */
            DosSleep( (argv[1][0] - 'A' + 1) * 1000L );
            printf( "Hi, dad. It's %s.\n", argv[1] );
        }
    }


Output



    Come here, Carl
    Hi, dad. It's Ann.
    Hi, dad. It's Beth.
    Hi, dad. It's Carl.
    Thank you, Carl
    Hi, dad. It's Dave.





dieeetomsbin, dmsbintoieee
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Convert between IEEE double value and Microsoft (MS) binary double value.

    #include <math.h>

    int dieeetomsbin( double *src8, double *dst8 );

    int dmsbintoieee( double *src8, double *dst8 );

src8                              Buffer containing value to convert

dst8                              Buffer to store converted value


Remarks

The dieeetomsbin routine converts a double-precision number in IEEE
(Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers) format to Microsoft (MS)
binary format. The routine dmsbintoieee converts a double-precision number
in MS binary format to IEEE format.

These routines allow C programs (which store floating-point numbers in the
IEEE format) to use numeric data in random-access data files created with
those versions of Microsoft BASIC that store floating-point numbers in MS
binary format, and vice versa.

The argument src8 is a pointer to the double value to be converted. The
result is stored at the location given by dst8.

These routines do not handle IEEE NANs ("not a number") and infinities. IEEE
denormals are treated as 0 in the conversions.


Return Value

These functions return 0 if the conversion is successful and 1 if the
conversion causes an overflow.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

fieeetomsbin, fmsbintoieee





difftime
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Finds the difference between two times.

#include <time.h>                 Required only for function declarations

    double difftime( time_t timer1, time_t timer0 );

timer0                            Beginning time

timer1                            Ending time


Remarks

The difftime function computes the difference between the supplied time
values, timer0 and timer1.


Return Value

The difftime function returns, in seconds, the elapsed time from timer0 to
timer1. The value returned is a double-precision number.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

time


Example

    /* DIFFTIME.C: This program calculates the amount of time needed to
    * do a floating-point multiply 50000 times.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <time.h>

    void main()
    {
        time_t   start, finish;
        unsigned loop;
        double   result, elapsed_time;

        printf( "This program will do a floating point multiply 50000 times\n"
);
        printf( "Working...\n" );

        time( &start );
        for( loop = 0; loop < 50000L; loop++ )
        result = 3.63 * 5.27;
        time( &finish );

    elapsed_time = difftime( finish, start );
        printf( "\nProgram takes %6.2f seconds.\n", elapsed_time );
    }


Output



    This program will do a floating point multiply 50000 times
    Working...

    Program takes   4.00 seconds.





_displaycursor
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Sets the cursor toggle for graphics functions.

    #include <graph.h>

    short _far _displaycursor( short toggle );

toggle                            Cursor state


Remarks

Upon entry into each graphic routine, the screen cursor is turned off. The
_displaycursor function determines whether the cursor will be turned back on
when programs exit graphic routines. If toggle is set to _GCURSORON, the
cursor will be restored on exit. If toggle is set to _GCURSOROFF, the cursor
will be left off.


Return Value

The function returns the previous value of toggle. There is no error return.



Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_gettextcursor, _settextcursor


Example

    /* DISCURS.C: This program changes the cursor shape using _gettextcursor
    * and _settextcursor, and hides the cursor using _displaycursor.
    */

    #include <conio.h>
    #include <graph.h>

    void main()
    {
        short oldcursor;
        short newcursor = 0x007;        /* Full block cursor */

        /* Save old cursor shape and make sure cursor is on */
        oldcursor = _gettextcursor();
        _clearscreen( _GCLEARSCREEN );
        _displaycursor( _GCURSORON );
        _outtext( "\nOld cursor shape: " );
        getch();

        /* Change cursor shape */
        _outtext( "\nNew cursor shape: " );
        _settextcursor( newcursor );
        getch();

    /* Restore original cursor shape */
        _outtext( "\n" );
        _settextcursor( oldcursor );
    }





div
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Computes the quotient and the remainder of two integer values.

    #include <stdlib.h>

    div_t div( int numer, int denom );

numer                             Numerator

denom                             Denominator


Remarks

The div function divides numer by denom, computing the quotient and the
remainder. The div_t structure contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
int quot                          Quotient

int rem                           Remainder

The sign of the quotient is the same as that of the mathematical quotient.
Its absolute value is the largest integer that is less than the absolute
value of the mathematical quotient. If the denominator is 0, the program
will terminate with an error message.


Return Value

The div function returns a structure of type div_t, comprising both the
quotient and the remainder. The structure is defined in STDLIB.H.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

ldiv


Example

    /* DIV.C: This example takes two integers as command-line arguments and
    * displays the results of the integer division. This program accepts
    * two arguments on the command line following the program name, then
    * calls div to divide the first argument by the second. Finally,
    * it prints the structure members quot and rem.
    */

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <math.h>

    void main( int argc, char *argv[] )
    {
        int x,y;
        div_t div_result;

        x = atoi( argv[1] );
        y = atoi( argv[2] );

        printf( "x is %d, y is %d\n", x, y );
        div_result = div( x, y );
        printf( "The quotient is %d, and the remainder is %d\n",
                div_result.quot, div_result.rem );
    }


Output



    [C:\LIBREF] div 876 13
    x is 876, y is 13
    The quotient is 67, and the remainder is 5





_dos_allocmem
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Allocates a block of memory, using DOS service 0x48.

    #include <dos.h>

    #include <errno.h>

    unsigned _dos_allocmem( unsigned size, unsigned *seg );

size                              Block size to allocate

seg                               Return buffer for segment descriptor


Remarks

The _dos_allocmem function uses DOS service 0x48 to allocate a block of
memory size paragraphs long. (A paragraph is 16 bytes.) Allocated blocks are
always paragraph aligned. The segment descriptor for the initial segment of
the new block is returned in the word that seg points to. If the request
cannot be satisfied, the maximum possible size (in paragraphs) is returned
in this word instead.


Return Value

If successful, the _dos_allocmem returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the DOS
error code and sets errno to ENOMEM, indicating insufficient memory or
invalid arena (memory area) headers.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

alloca, calloc functions, _dos_freemem, _dos_setblock, halloc, malloc
functions


Example

    /* DALOCMEM.C: This program allocates 20 paragraphs of memory, increases
    * the allocation to 40 paragraphs, and then frees the memory space.
    */

    #include <dos.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned segment;
        unsigned maxsize;

    /* Allocate 20 paragraphs */
        if( _dos_allocmem( 20, &segment ) != 0 )
        printf( "allocation failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "allocation successful\n" );

        /* Increase allocation to 40 paragraphs */
        if( _dos_setblock( 40, segment, &maxsize ) != 0 )
        printf( "allocation increase failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "allocation increase successful\n" );

        /* free memory */
        if( _dos_freemem( segment ) != 0 )
        printf( "free memory failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "free memory successful\n" );
    }


Output



    allocation successful
    allocation increase successful
    free memory successful





_dos_close
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Closes a file using system call INT 0x3E.

#include <dos.h>

#include <errno.h>

    unsigned _dos_close( int handle );

handle                            Target file handle


Remarks

The _dos_close function uses system call 0x3E to close the file indicated by
handle. The file's handle argument is returned by the call that created or
last opened the file.


Return Value

The function returns 0 if successful. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to EBADF, indicating an invalid file handle.

Do not use the DOS interface I/O routines with the console, low-level, or
stream I/O routines.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

close, creat,  _dos_creat functions,  _dos_open,  _dos_read,  _dos_write,
dup, open


Example

    /* DOPEN.C: This program uses DOS I/O functions to open and close a file.
    */

    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        int fh;

        /* Open file with _dos_open function */
        if( _dos_open( "data1", O_RDONLY, &fh ) != 0 )
        perror( "Open failed on input file\n" );
        else
        printf( "Open succeeded on input file\n" );

    /* Close file with _dos_close function */
        if( _dos_close( fh ) != 0 )
        perror( "Close failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "File successfully closed\n" );
    }


Output



    Open succeeded on input file
    File successfully closed





_dos_creat Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Create a new file.

#include <dos.h>

#include <errno.h>

    unsigned _dos_creat( char *filename, unsigned attrib, int *handle );

    unsigned _dos_creatnew( char *filename, unsigned attrib, int *handle );

filename                          File path name

attrib                            File attributes

handle                            Handle return buffer


Remarks

The _dos_creat and _dos_creatnew routines create and open a new file named
filename; this new file has the access attributes specified in the attrib
argument. The new file's handle is copied into the integer location pointed
to by handle. The file is opened for both read and write access. If file
sharing is installed, the file is opened in compatibility mode.

The _dos_creat routine uses system call INT 0x3C, and the _dos_creatnew
routine uses system call INT 0x5B. If the file already exists, _dos_creat
erases its contents and leaves its attributes unchanged; however, the
_dos_creatnew routine fails if the file already exists.


Return Value

If successful, both routines return 0. Otherwise, they return the DOS error
code and set errno to one of the following values:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EACCES                            Access denied because the directory is
                                    full or, for _dos_creat only, the file
                                    exists and cannot be overwritten

EEXIST                            File already exists (_dos_creatnew only)

EMFILE                            Too many open file handles

ENOENT                            Path or file not found


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* DCREAT.C: This program creates a file using the _dos_creat function.
    The
    * program cannot create a new file using the _dos_creatnew function
    * because it already exists.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        int fh1, fh2;
        int result;

        if( _dos_creat( "data", _A_NORMAL, &fh1 ) != 0 )
        printf( "Couldn't create data file\n" );
        else
        {
        printf( "Created data file.\n" );

        /* If _dos_creat is successful, the _dos_creatnew call
            * will fail since the file exists
            */
        if( _dos_creatnew( "data", _A_RDONLY, &fh2 ) != 0 )
            printf( "Couldn't create data file\n" );
        else
        {
            printf( "Created data file.\n" );
            _dos_close( fh2 );
        }
        _dos_close( fh1 );
        }
    }


Output



    Created data file.
    Couldn't create data file





_dos_find Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Find the file with the specified attributes or find the next file with the
specified attributes.

    #include <dos.h>

    #include <errno.h>

    unsigned _dos_findfirst( char *filename, unsigned attrib, struct find_t
    *fileinfo );

    unsigned _dos_findnext( struct find_t *fileinfo );

filename                          Target file name

attrib                            Target attributes

fileinfo                          File-information buffer


Remarks

The _dos_findfirst routine uses system call INT 0x4E to return information
about the first instance of a file whose name and attributes match filename
and attrib.

The filename argument may use wildcards (* and ?). The attrib argument can
be any of the following manifest constants:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_A_ARCH                           Archive. Set whenever the file is
                                    changed, and cleared by the DOS BACKUP
                                    command.

_A_HIDDEN                         Hidden file. Cannot be found with the
                                    DOS DIR command. Returns information
                                    about normal files as well as about
                                    files with this attribute.

_A_NORMAL                         Normal. File can be read or written
                                    without restriction.

_A_RDONLY                         Read-only. File cannot be opened for
                                    writing, and a file with the same name
                                    cannot be created. Returns information
                                    about normal files as well as about
                                    files with this attribute.

_A_SUBDIR                         Subdirectory. Returns information about
                                    normal files as well as about files with
                                    this attribute.

_A_SYSTEM                         System file. Cannot be found with the
                                    DOS DIR command. Returns information
                                    about normal files as well as about
                                    files with this attribute.

_A_VOLID                          Volume ID. Only one file can have this
                                    attribute, and it must be in the root
                                    directory.

Multiple constants can be combined (with the OR operator), using the
vertical-bar ( | ) character.

If the attributes argument to either of these functions is _A_RDONLY,
_A_HIDDEN, _A_SYSTEM, or _A_SUBDIR, the function also returns any normal
attribute files that match the filename argument. That is, a normal file
does not have a read-only, hidden, system, or directory attribute.

Information is returned in a find_t structure, defined in DOS.H. The find_t
structure contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
char reserved[21]                 Reserved for use by DOS

char attrib                       Attribute byte for matched path

unsigned wr_time                  Time of last write to file

unsigned wr_date                  Date of last write to file

long size                         Length of file in bytes

char name[13]                     Null-terminated name of matched
                                    file/directory, without
                                    the path

The formats for the wr_time and wr_date elements are in DOS format and are
not usable by any other C run-time function. The time format is shown below:


Bits                              Contents
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
0 - 4                             Number of 2-second increments (0 - 29)

5 -10                             Minutes (0 - 59)

11-15                             Hours (0 - 23)

The date format is shown below:

Bits                              Contents
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
0 - 4                             Day of month (1-31)

5 - 8                             Month (1-12)

9 -15                             Year (relative to 1980)

Do not alter the contents of the buffer between a call to _dos_findfirst and
a subsequent call to the _dos_findnext function. Also, the buffer should not
be altered between calls to _dos_findnext.

The _dos_findnext routine uses system call 0x4F to find the next name, if
any, that matches the filename and attrib arguments specified in a prior
call to _dos_findfirst. The fileinfo argument must point to a structure
initialized by a previous call to _dos_findfirst. The contents of the
structure will be altered as described above if a match is found.


Return Value

If successful, both functions return 0. Otherwise, they return the DOS error
code and set errno to ENOENT, indicating that  filename could not be
matched.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* DFIND.C: This program finds and prints all files in the current
    directory with
    * the .c extension.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    main()
    {
        struct find_t  c_file;

        /* find first .c file in current directory */
        _dos_findfirst( "*.c", _A_NORMAL, &c_file );

        printf( "Listing of .c files\n\n" );
        printf( "File: %s is %ld bytes\n", c_file.name, c_file.size );

        /* find the rest of the .c files */
        while( _dos_findnext( &c_file ) == 0 )
        printf( "File: %s is %ld bytes\n", c_file.name, c_file.size );
    }


Output



    Listing of .c files

    File: CHDIR.C is 524 bytes
    File: SIGFP.C is 2674 bytes
    File: MAX.C is 258 bytes
    File: CGETS.C is 577 bytes
    File: FWRITE.C is 1123 bytes





_dos_freemem
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Releases a block of memory (INT 0x49).

    #include <dos.h>

    #include <errno.h>

    unsigned _dos_freemem( unsigned seg );

seg                               Block to be released


Remarks

The _dos_freemem function uses system call 0x49 to release a block of memory
previously allocated by _dos_allocmem. The seg argument is a value returned
by a previous call to _dos_allocmem. The freed memory may no longer be used
by the application program.


Return Value

If successful, _dos_freemem returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to ENOMEM, indicating a bad segment value (one that does
not correspond to a segment returned by a previous _dos_allocmem call) or
invalid arena headers.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_allocmem,  _dos_setblock, free functions


Example

    /* DALOCMEM.C: This program allocates 20 paragraphs of memory, increases
    * the allocation to 40 paragraphs, and then frees the memory space.
    */

    #include <dos.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned segment;
        unsigned maxsize;

        /* Allocate 20 paragraphs */
        if( _dos_allocmem( 20, &segment ) != 0 )
        printf( "allocation failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "allocation successful\n" );

    /* Increase allocation to 40 paragraphs */
        if( _dos_setblock( 40, segment, &maxsize ) != 0 )
        printf( "allocation increase failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "allocation increase successful\n" );

        /* Free memory */
        if( _dos_freemem( segment ) != 0 )
        printf( "free memory failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "free memory successful\n" );
    }


Output



    allocation successful
    allocation increase successful
    free memory successful





_dos_getdate
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets current system date using system call INT 0x2A.

    #include <dos.h>

    void _dos_getdate( struct dosdate_t *date );

date                              Current system date


Remarks

The _dos_getdate routine uses system call 0x2A to obtain the current system
date. The date is returned in a dosdate_t structure, defined in DOS.H.

The dosdate_t structure contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
unsigned char day                 1-31

unsigned char month               1-12

unsigned int year                 1980 - 2099

unsigned char dayofweek           0 - 6 (0 = Sunday)


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_gettime,  _dos_setdate,  _dos_settime, gmtime, localtime, mktime,
_strdate, _strtime, time


Example

    /* DGTIME.C: This program gets and displays current date and time values.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        struct dosdate_t date;
        struct dostime_t time;

    /* Get current date and time values */

        _dos_getdate( &date );
        _dos_gettime( &time );

        printf( "Today's date is %d-%d-%d\n", date.month, date.day, date.year
);
        printf( "The time is %02d:%02d\n", time.hour, time.minute );
    }


Output



    Today's date is 6-15-1989
    The time is 18:07





_dos_getdiskfree
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets disk information using system call INT 0x36.

    #include <dos.h>

    #include <errno.h>

    unsigned _dos_getdiskfree( unsigned drive, struct diskfree_t *diskspace );

drive                             Drive number (default is 0)

diskspace                         Buffer to hold disk information


Remarks

The _dos_getdiskfree routine uses system call 0x36 to obtain information on
the disk drive specified by drive. The default drive is 0, drive A is 1,
drive B is 2, and so on. Information is returned in the diskfree_t structure
(defined in DOS.H) pointed to by diskspace.

The struct diskfree_t structure contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
unsigned total_clusters           Total clusters on disk

unsigned avail_clusters           Available clusters on disk

unsigned sectors_per_cluster      Sectors per cluster

unsigned bytes_per_sector         Bytes per sector


Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns a nonzero value
and sets errno to EINVAL, indicating that an invalid drive was specified.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_getdrive, _dos_setdrive


Example

    /* DGDISKFR.C: This program displays information about the default disk
    drive. */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    main()
    {
        struct diskfree_t drive;

        /* Get information on default disk drive 0 */

        _dos_getdiskfree( 0, &drive );
        printf( "total clusters: %d\n", drive.total_clusters );
        printf( "available clusters: %d\n", drive.avail_clusters );
        printf( "sectors per cluster: %d\n", drive.sectors_per_cluster );
        printf( "bytes per sector: %d\n", drive.bytes_per_sector );
    }


Output



    total clusters: 9013
    available clusters: 6030
    sectors per cluster: 4
    bytes per sector: 512





_dos_getdrive
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets the current disk drive using system call INT 0x19.

    #include <dos.h>

    void _dos_getdrive( unsigned *drive );

drive                             Current-drive return buffer


Remarks

The _dos_getdrive routine uses system call 0x19 to obtain the current disk
drive. The current drive is returned in the word that drive points to: 1 =
drive A, 2 = drive B, and so on.


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_getdiskfree,  _dos_setdrive,  _getdrive


Example

    /* DGDRIVE.C: This program prints the letter of the current drive,
    * changes the default drive to A, then returns the number of disk drives.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned olddrive, newdrive;
        unsigned number_of_drives;

        /* Print current default drive information */
        _dos_getdrive( &olddrive );
        printf( "The current drive is: %c\n", 'A' + olddrive1 );

        /* Set default drive to be drive A */
        printf( "Changing default drive to A\n");
        _dos_setdrive( 1, &number_of_drives );

        /* Get new default drive information and total number of drives */
        _dos_getdrive( &newdrive );
        printf( "The current drive is: %c\n", 'A' + newdrive1 );
        printf( "Number of logical drives: %d\n", number_of_drives );

    /* Restore default drive */
        _dos_setdrive( olddrive, &number_of_drives );
    }


Output



    The current drive is: C
    Changing default drive to A
    The current drive is: A
    Number of logical drives: 26





_dos_getfileattr
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets the current attributes of a file or directory, using system call INT
0x43.

    #include <dos.h>

    #include <errno.h>

    unsigned _dos_getfileattr( char *pathname, unsigned *attrib );

pathname                          Full path of target file/directory

attrib                            Word to store attributes in


Remarks

The _dos_getfileattr routine uses system call 0x43 to obtain the current
attributes of the file or directory pointed to by pathname . The attributes
are copied to the low-order byte of the attrib word. Attributes are
represented by manifest constants, as described below:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_A_ARCH                           Archive. Set whenever the file is
                                    changed, or cleared by the DOS BACKUP
                                    command.

_A_HIDDEN                         Hidden file. Cannot be found by a
                                    directory search.

_A_NORMAL                         Normal. File can be read or written
                                    without restriction.

_A_RDONLY                         Read-only. File cannot be opened for a
                                    write, and a file with the same name
                                    cannot be created.

_A_SUBDIR                         Subdirectory.

_A_SYSTEM                         System file. Cannot be found by a
                                    directory search.

_A_VOLID                          Volume ID. Only one file can have this
                                    attribute, and it must be in the root
                                    directory.




Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to ENOENT, indicating that the target file or directory
could be found.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

access, chmod, _dos_setfileattr, umask


Example

    /* DGFILEAT.C: This program creates a file with the specified attributes,
    * then prints this information before changing the file attributes back
    * to normal.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned oldattrib, newattrib;
        int fh;

        /* Get and display file attribute */
        _dos_getfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", &oldattrib );
        printf( "Attribute: 0x%.4x\n", oldattrib );
        if( ( oldattrib & _A_RDONLY ) != 0 )
        printf( "Read only file\n" );
        else
        printf( "Not a read only file.\n" );

        /* Reset file attribute to normal file */
        _dos_setfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", _A_RDONLY );
        _dos_getfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", &newattrib );
        printf( "Attribute: 0x%.4x\n", newattrib );

        /* Restore file attribute */
        _dos_setfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", oldattrib );
        _dos_getfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", &newattrib );
        printf( "Attribute: 0x%.4x\n", newattrib );
    }


Output



    Attribute: 0x0020
    Not a read only file.
    Attribute: 0x0001
    Attribute: 0x0020





_dos_getftime
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets the date and time a file was last written, using system call INT 0x57.


    #include <dos.h>

    #include <errno.h>

    unsigned _dos_getftime( int handle, unsigned *date, unsigned *time );

handle                            Target file

date                              Date-return buffer

time                              Time-return buffer


Remarks

The _dos_getftime routine uses system call 0x57 to get the date and time
that the specified file was last written. The file must have been opened
with a call to _dos_open or _dos_creat prior to calling _dos_getftime. The
date and time are returned in the words pointed to by date and time. The
values appear in the DOS date and time format:

Time Bits                         Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
0 - 4                             Number of 2-second increments (0 -29)

5 -10                             Minutes (0 -59)

11-15                             Hours (0 -23)

Date Bits                         Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
0 - 4                             Day (1-31)

5 - 8                             Month (1-12)

9 -15                             Year (1980 -2099)


Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to EBADF, indicating that an invalid file handle was
passed.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_setftime, fstat, stat


Example

    /* DGFTIME.C: This program displays and modifies the date and time
    * fields of a file.
    */

    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
                                    /* FEDC BA98 7654 3210          */
        unsigned new_date = 0x184f;   /* 0001 1000 0100 1111  2/15/92 */
        unsigned new_time = 0x48e0;   /* 0100 1000 1110 0000  9:07 AM */
        unsigned old_date, old_time;

        int fh;

        /* Open file with _dos_open function */
        if( _dos_open( "dgftime.obj", O_RDONLY, &fh ) != 0 )
        exit( 1 );

        /* Get file date and time */
        _dos_getftime( fh, &old_date, &old_time );
        printf( "Old date field: 0x%.4x\n", old_date );
        printf( "Old time field: 0x%.4x\n", old_time );
        system( "dir dgftime.obj" );

        /* Modify file date and time */
        if( !_dos_setftime( fh, new_date, new_time ) )
        {
        _dos_getftime( fh, &new_date, &new_time );
        printf( "New date field: 0x%.4x\n", new_date );
        printf( "New time field: 0x%.4x\n", new_time );
        system( "dir dgftime.obj" );

        /* Restore date and time */
        _dos_setftime( fh, old_date, old_time );
        }
        _dos_close( fh );
    }


Output



    Old date field: 0x12cf
    Old time field: 0x94bb

    Volume in drive C is OS2
    Directory of  C:\LIBREF

    DGFTIME  OBJ     3923   6-15-89   6:37p
            1 File(s)  13676544 bytes free

    New date field: 0x184f
    New time field: 0x48e0

    Volume in drive C is OS2
    Directory of  C:\LIBREF

    DGFTIME  OBJ     3923   2-15-92   9:07a
            1 File(s)  13676544 bytes free





_dos_gettime
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets the current system time, using system call INT 0x2C.

    #include <dos.h>

    void _dos_gettime( struct dostime_t *time );

time                              Current system time


Remarks

The _dos_gettime routine uses system call 0x2C to obtain the current system
time. The time is returned in a dostime_t structure, defined in DOS.H.

The dostime_t structure contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
unsigned char hour                0 -23

unsigned char minute              0 -59

unsigned char second              0 -59

unsigned char hsecond             1/100 second; 0 -99


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_getdate,  _dos_setdate,  _dos_settime, gmtime, localtime,  _strtime


Example

    /* DGTIME.C: This program gets and displays current date and time values.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        struct dosdate_t date;
        struct dostime_t time;

    /* Get current date and time values */

        _dos_getdate( &date );
        _dos_gettime( &time );

        printf( "Today's date is %d-%d-%d\n", date.month, date.day, date.year
);
        printf( "The time is %02d:%02d\n", time.hour, time.minute );
    }


Output



    Today's date is 6-15-1989
    The time is 18:07





_dos_getvect
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets the current value of the interrupt vector, using system call INT 0x35.


    #include <dos.h>

    void ( _interrupt _far *_dos_getvect( unsigned intnum))();

intnum                            Target interrupt vector


Remarks

The _dos_getvect routine uses system call INT 0x35 to get the current value
of the interrupt vector specified by intnum.

This routine is typically used in conjunction with the _dos_setvect
function. To replace an interrupt vector, first save the current vector of
the interrupt using _dos_getvect. Then set the vector to your own interrupt
routine with _dos_setvect. The saved vector can later be restored, if
necessary, using _dos_setvect. The user-defined routine may also need the
original vector in order to call that vector or chain to it with
_chain_intr.


Return Value

The function returns a far pointer for the intnum interrupt to the current
handler, if there is one.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_chain_intr,  _dos_keep,  _dos_setvect





_dos_keep
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Installs TSR (terminate-and-stay-resident) programs in memory, using system
call INT 0x31.

    #include <dos.h>

    void _dos_keep( unsigned retcode, unsigned memsize );

retcode                           Exit status code

memsize                           Allocated resident memory (in 16-byte
                                    paragraphs)


Remarks

The _dos_keep routine installs TSRs (terminate-and-stay-resident programs)
in memory, using system call INT 0x31.

The routine first exits the calling process, leaving it in memory. It then
returns the low-order byte of retcode to the parent of the calling process.
Before returning execution to the parent process, _dos_keep sets the
allocated memory for the now-resident process to memsize 16-byte paragraphs.
Any excess memory is returned to the system.

The _dos_keep function calls the same internal routines called by exit. It
therefore takes the following actions:


    ■   Calls atexit and onexit if defined.

    ■   Flushes all file buffers.

    ■   Restores interrupt vectors replaced by the C start-up code. The
        primary one is interrupt 0 (divide by zero). If the emulator math
        library is used and there is no coprocessor, interrupts 0x34 through
        0x3D are restored. If there is a coprocessor, interrupt 2 is restored.


The _dos_keep function does not automatically close files; you should do
this specifically unless you want files opened by the TSR installation code
to remain open for the TSR.

Do not use the emulator math library in TSRs unless you are familiar with
the C start-up code and the coprocessor. Use the alternate math package (not
supplied with Microsoft QuickC) if the TSR must do floating-point math.

Do not run programs that use _dos_keep from inside the Microsoft
Programmer's WorkBench environment, since doing so causes subsequent memory
problems. The _dos_keep function terminates the program when executed in the
Programmer's WorkBench environment.


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_cexit,  _chain_intr,  _dos_getvect,  _dos_setvect,  _exit





_dos_open
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Opens a file, using system call INT 0x3D.

#include <dos.h>

#include <errno.h>

#include <fcntl.h>                Access mode constants

#include <share.h>                Sharing mode constants

    unsigned _dos_open( char *filename, unsigned mode, int *handle );

filename                          Path to an existing file

mode                              Permissions

handle                            Pointer to integer


Remarks

The _dos_open routine uses system call INT 0x3D to open the existing file
pointed to by filename. The handle for the opened file is copied into the
integer pointed to by handle. The mode argument specifies the file's access,
sharing, and inheritance modes by combining (with the OR operator) manifest
constants from the three groups shown below. At most, one access mode and
one sharing mode can be specified at a time.

╓┌─────────────┌────────────────────────────────┌────────────────────────────►
Constant      Mode                             Meaning
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
O_RDONLY      Access                           Read-only
Constant      Mode                             Meaning
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
O_RDONLY      Access                           Read-only

O_WRONLY      Access                           Write-only

O_RDWR        Access                           Both read and write

SH_COMPAT     Sharing                          Compatibility

SH_DENYRW     Sharing                          Deny reading and writing

SH_DENYWR     Sharing                          Deny writing

SH_DENYRD     Sharing                          Deny reading

SH_DENYNO     Sharing                          Deny neither

O_NOINHERIT   Inheritance by the child         File is not inherited
                process

Constant      Mode                             Meaning
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────



Do not use the DOS interface I/O routines in conjunction with the console,
low-level, or stream I/O routines.


Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to one of the following manifest constants:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EACCES                            Access denied (possible reasons include
                                    specifying a directory or volume ID for
                                    filename, or opening a read-only file
                                    for write access)

EINVAL                            Sharing mode specified when file sharing
                                    not installed, or
                                    access-mode value is invalid

EMFILE                            Too many open file handles

ENOENT                            Path or file not found


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_close,  _dos_read,  _dos_write


Example

    /* DOPEN.C: This program uses DOS I/O functions to open and close a file.
    */

    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        int fh;

        /* Open file with _dos_open function */
        if( _dos_open( "data1", O_RDONLY, &fh ) != 0 )
        perror( "Open failed on input file\n" );
        else
        printf( "Open succeeded on input file\n" );

        /* Close file with _dos_close function */
        if( _dos_close( fh ) != 0 )
        perror( "Close failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "File successfully closed\n" );
    }


Output



    Open succeeded on input file
    File successfully closed





_dos_read
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Reads data from a file, using system call INT 0x3F.

    #include <dos.h>

    unsigned _dos_read( int handle, void _far *buffer, unsigned count,
    unsigned *numread );

handle                            File to read

buffer                            Buffer to write to

count                             Number of bytes to read

numread                           Number of bytes actually read


Remarks

The _dos_read routine uses system call INT 0x3F to read count bytes of data
from the file specified by handle. The routine then copies the data to the
buffer pointed to by buffer. The integer pointed to by numread will show the
number of bytes actually read, which may be less than the number requested
in count. If the number of bytes actually read is 0, it means the routine
tried to read at end-of-file.

Do not use the DOS interface I/O routines in conjunction with the console,
low-level, or stream I/O routines.


Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to one of the following constants:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EACCES                            Access denied (handle is not open for
                                    read access)

EBADF                             File handle is invalid


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_close,  _dos_open,  _dos_write, read


Example

    /* DREAD.C: This program uses the DOS I/O operations to read the contents
    * of a file.
    */

    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        int fh;
        char buffer[50];
        unsigned number_read;

        /* Open file with _dos_open function */
        if( _dos_open( "dread.c", O_RDONLY, &fh ) != 0 )
        perror( "Open failed on input file\n" );
        else
        printf( "Open succeeded on input file\n" );

        /* Read data with _dos_read function */
        _dos_read( fh, buffer, 50, &number_read );
        printf( "First 40 characters are: %.40s\n\n", buffer );

        /* Close file with _dos_close function */
        _dos_close( fh );
    }


Output



    Open succeeded on input file
    First 40 characters are: /* DREAD.C: This program uses the DOS I/





_dos_setblock
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Changes the size of a memory segment, using system call INT 0x4A.

    #include <dos.h>

    unsigned _dos_setblock( unsigned size, unsigned seg, unsigned *maxsize );

size                              New segment size

seg                               Target segment

maxsize                           Maximum-size buffer


Remarks

The _dos_setblock routine uses system call INT 0x4A to change the size of
seg, previously allocated by _dos_allocmem, to size paragraphs. If the
request cannot be satisfied, the maximum possible segment size is copied to
the buffer pointed to by maxsize.


Return Value

The function returns 0 if successful. If the call fails, it returns the DOS
error code and sets errno to ENOMEM, indicating a bad segment value was
passed. A bad segment value is one that does not correspond to a segment
returned from a previous _dos_allocmem call, or one that contains invalid
arena headers.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_allocmem,  _dos_freemem, realloc functions


Example

    /* DALOCMEM.C: This program allocates 20 paragraphs of memory, increases
    * the allocation to 40 paragraphs, and then frees the memory space.
    */

    #include <dos.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned segment;
        unsigned maxsize;

    /* Allocate 20 paragraphs */
        if( _dos_allocmem( 20, &segment ) != 0 )
        printf( "allocation failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "allocation successful\n" );

        /* Increase allocation to 40 paragraphs */
        if( _dos_setblock( 40, segment, &maxsize ) != 0 )
        printf( "allocation increase failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "allocation increase successful\n" );

        /* Free memory */
        if( _dos_freemem( segment ) != 0 )
        printf( "free memory failed\n" );
        else
        printf( "free memory successful\n" );
    }


Output



    allocation successful
    allocation increase successful
    free memory successful





_dos_setdate
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Sets the current system date, using system call INT 0x2B.

    #include <dos.h>

    unsigned _dos_setdate( struct dosdate_t *date );

date                              New system date


Remarks

The _dos_setdate routine uses system call INT 0x2B to set the current system
date. The date is stored in the dosdate_t structure pointed to by date,
defined in DOS.H. The dosdate_t structure contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
unsigned char day                 1 -31

unsigned char month               1 -12

unsigned int year                 1980 - 2099

unsigned char dayofweek           0 - 6 (0 = Sunday)


Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns a nonzero value
and sets errno to EINVAL, indicating an invalid date was specified.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_gettime,  _dos_setdate,  _dos_settime, gmtime, localtime, mktime,
_strdate, _strtime, time


Example

    /* DSTIME.C: This program changes the time and date values and displays
    the
    * new date and time values.
    */

    #include <dos.h>
    #include <conio.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <time.h>

    void main()
    {
        struct dosdate_t olddate, newdate = { { 4 }, { 7 }, { 1984 } };
        struct dostime_t oldtime, newtime = { { 3 }, { 45 }, { 30 }, { 0 } };
        char   datebuf[40], timebuf[40];

        /* Get current date and time values */
        _dos_getdate( &olddate );
        _dos_gettime( &oldtime );
        printf( "%s    %s\n" , _strdate( datebuf ), _strtime( timebuf ) );

        /* Modify date and time structures */
        _dos_setdate( &newdate );
        _dos_settime( &newtime );
        printf( "%s    %s\n" , _strdate( datebuf ), _strtime( timebuf ) );

        /* Restore old date and time */
        _dos_setdate( &olddate );
        _dos_settime( &oldtime );
    }


Output



    06/15/89    18:26:09
    07/04/84    03:45:30





_dos_setdrive
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Sets the default drive, using system call INT 0x0E.

    #include <dos.h>

    void _dos_setdrive( unsigned drive, unsigned *numdrives );

drive                             New default drive

numdrives                         Total drives available


Remarks

The _dos_setdrive routine uses system call INT 0x0E to set the current
default drive to the drive argument: 1 = drive A, 2 = drive B, and so on.
The numdrives argument indicates the total number of drives in the system.
If this value is 4, for example, it does not mean the drives are designated
A, B, C, and D; it means only that four drives are in the system.


Return Value

There is no return value. If an invalid drive number is passed, the function
fails without indication. Use the _dos_getdrive routine to verify whether
the desired drive has been set.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_getdiskfree,  _dos_getdrive


Example

    /* DGDRIVE.C: This program prints the letter of the current drive,
    * changes the default drive to A, then returns the number of disk drives.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned olddrive, newdrive;
        unsigned number_of_drives;

        /* Print current default drive information */
        _dos_getdrive( &olddrive );
        printf( "The current drive is: %c\n", 'A' + olddrive1 );

        /* Set default drive to be drive A */
        printf( "Changing default drive to A\n");
        _dos_setdrive( 1, &number_of_drives );

        /* Get new default drive information and total number of drives */
        _dos_getdrive( &newdrive );
        printf( "The current drive is: %c\n", 'A' + newdrive1 );
        printf( "Number of logical drives: %d\n", number_of_drives );

        /* Restore default drive */
        _dos_setdrive( olddrive, &number_of_drives );
    }


Output



    The current drive is: C
    Changing default drive to A
    The current drive is: A
    Number of logical drives: 26





_dos_setfileattr
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Sets the attributes of the file or directory, using system call INT 0x43.

    #include <dos.h>

    unsigned _dos_setfileattr( char *pathname, unsigned attrib );

pathname                          Full path of target file/directory

attrib                            New attributes


Remarks

The _dos_setfileattr routine uses system call INT 0x43 to set the attributes
of the file or directory pointed to by pathname. The actual attributes are
contained in the low-order byte of the attrib word. Attributes are
represented by manifest constants, as described below:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_A_ARCH                           Archive. Set whenever the file is
                                    changed, or cleared by the DOS BACKUP
                                    command.

_A_HIDDEN                         Hidden file. Cannot be found by a
                                    directory search.

_A_NORMAL                         Normal. File can be read or written to
                                    without restriction.

_A_RDONLY                         Read-only. File cannot be opened for
                                    writing, and a file with the same name
                                    cannot be created.

_A_SUBDIR                         Subdirectory.

_A_SYSTEM                         System file. Cannot be found by a
                                    directory search.

_A_VOLID                          Volume ID. Only one file can have this
                                    attribute, and it must be in the root
                                    directory.


Return Value

The function returns 0 if successful. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to one of the following:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EACCES                            Access denied; cannot change the volume
                                    ID or the
                                    subdirectory.

ENOENT                            No file or directory matching the target
                                    was found.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_getfileattr


Example

    /* DGFILEAT.C: This program creates a file with the specified attributes,
    * then prints this information before changing the file attributes back
    * to normal.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        unsigned oldattrib, newattrib;
        int fh;

        /* Get and display file attribute */
        _dos_getfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", &oldattrib );
        printf( "Attribute: 0x%.4x\n", oldattrib );
        if( ( oldattrib & _A_RDONLY ) != 0 )
        printf( "Read only file\n" );
        else
        printf( "Not a read only file.\n" );

        /* Reset file attribute to normal file */
        _dos_setfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", _A_RDONLY );
        _dos_getfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", &newattrib );
        printf( "Attribute: 0x%.4x\n", newattrib );

        /* Restore file attribute */
        _dos_setfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", oldattrib );
        _dos_getfileattr( "DGFILEAT.C", &newattrib );
        printf( "Attribute: 0x%.4x\n", newattrib );
    }


Output



    Attribute: 0x0020
    Not a read only file.
    Attribute: 0x0001
    Attribute: 0x0020





_dos_setftime
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Sets the date and time for a file, using system call INT 0x57.

    #include <dos.h>

    unsigned _dos_setftime( int handle, unsigned date, unsigned time );

handle                            Target file

date                              Date of last write

time                              Time of last write


Remarks

The _dos_setftime routine uses system call INT 0x57 to set the date and time
at which the file identified by handle was last written to. These values
appear in the DOS date and time format, described in the following lists:

Time Bits                         Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
0 - 4                             Number of two-second increments (0 -29)

5 - 10                            Minutes (0 -59)

11-15                             Hours (0 -23)

Date Bits                         Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
0 - 4                             Day (1-31)

5 -8                              Month (1-12)

9 -15                             Year since 1980 (for example, 1989 is
                                    stored as 9)


Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to EBADF, indicating that an invalid file handle was
passed.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_getftime, fstat, stat


Example

    /* DGFTIME.C: This program displays and modifies the date and time
    * fields of a file.
    */

    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
                                    /* FEDC BA98 7654 3210          */
        unsigned new_date = 0x184f;   /* 0001 1000 0100 1111  2/15/92 */
        unsigned new_time = 0x48e0;   /* 0100 1000 1110 0000  9:07 AM */
        unsigned old_date, old_time;

        int fh;

        /* Open file with _dos_open function */
        if( _dos_open( "dgftime.obj", O_RDONLY, &fh ) != 0 )
        exit( 1 );

        /* Get file date and time */
        _dos_getftime( fh, &old_date, &old_time );
        printf( "Old date field: 0x%.4x\n", old_date );
        printf( "Old time field: 0x%.4x\n", old_time );
        system( "dir dgftime.obj" );

        /* Modify file date and time */
        if( !_dos_setftime( fh, new_date, new_time ) )
        {
        _dos_getftime( fh, &new_date, &new_time );
        printf( "New date field: 0x%.4x\n", new_date );
        printf( "New time field: 0x%.4x\n", new_time );
        system( "dir dgftime.obj" );

        /* Restore date and time */
        _dos_setftime( fh, old_date, old_time );
        }
        _dos_close( fh );
    }


Output



    Old date field: 0x12cf
    Old time field: 0x94bb

    Volume in drive C is OS2
    Directory of  C:\LIBREF

    DGFTIME  OBJ     3923   6-15-89   6:37p
            1 File(s)  13676544 bytes free

    New date field: 0x184f
    New time field: 0x48e0

    Volume in drive C is OS2
    Directory of  C:\LIBREF

    DGFTIME  OBJ     3923   2-15-92   9:07a
            1 File(s)  13676544 bytes free





_dos_settime
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Sets the current system time, using system call INT 0x2D.

    #include <dos.h>

    unsigned _dos_settime( struct dostime_t *time );

time                              New system time


Remarks

The _dos_settime routine uses system call INT 0x2D to set the current system
time to the value stored in the dostime_t structure that time points to, as
defined in DOS.H. The dostime_t structure contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
unsigned char hour                0 -23

unsigned char minute              0 -59

unsigned char second              0 -59

unsigned char hsecond             Hundredths of a second; 0 -99


Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns a nonzero value
and sets errno to EINVAL, indicating an invalid time was specified.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_getdate,  _dos_gettime,  _dos_setdate, gmtime, localtime, mktime,
_strdate,  _strtime


Example

    /* DSTIME.C: This program changes the time and date values and displays
    the
    * new date and time values.
    */

    #include <dos.h>
    #include <conio.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <time.h>

    void main()
    {
        struct dosdate_t olddate, newdate = { { 4 }, { 7 }, { 1984 } };
        struct dostime_t oldtime, newtime = { { 3 }, { 45 }, { 30 }, { 0 } };
        char   datebuf[40], timebuf[40];

        /* Get current date and time values */
        _dos_getdate( &olddate );
        _dos_gettime( &oldtime );
        printf( "%s    %s\n" , _strdate( datebuf ), _strtime( timebuf ) );

        /* Modify date and time structures */
        _dos_setdate( &newdate );
        _dos_settime( &newtime );
        printf( "%s    %s\n" , _strdate( datebuf ), _strtime( timebuf ) );

        /* Restore old date and time */
        _dos_setdate( &olddate );
        _dos_settime( &oldtime );
    }


Output



    06/15/89    18:26:09
    07/04/84    03:45:30





_dos_setvect
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Sets the current value of the interrupt vector, using system call INT 0x25.


    #include <dos.h>

    void _dos_setvect( unsigned intnum, void( _interrupt _far *handler)( ));

intnum                            Target-interrupt vector

handler                           Interrupt handler for which to assign
                                    intnum


Remarks

The _dos_setvect routine uses system call INT 0x25 to set the current value
of the interrupt vector intnum to the function pointed to by handler.
Subsequently, whenever the intnum interrupt is generated, the handler
routine will be called. If handler is a C function, it must have been
previously declared with the interrupt attribute. Otherwise, you must make
sure that the function satisfies the requirements for an interrupt-handling
routine. For example, if handler is an assembler function, it must be a far
routine that returns with an IRET instead of a RET.

The interrupt attribute indicates that the function is an interrupt handler.
The compiler generates appropriate entry and exit sequences for the
interrupt-handling function, including saving and restoring all registers
and executing an IRET instruction to return.

The _dos_setvect routine is generally used with the _dos_getvect function.
To replace an interrupt vector, first save the current vector of the
interrupt using _dos_getvect. Then set the vector to your own interrupt
routine with _dos_setvect. The saved vector can later be restored, if
necessary, using _dos_setvect. The user-defined routine may also need the
original vector in order to call it or to chain to it with _chain_intr.


Registers and Interrupt Functions

When you call an interrupt function, the DS register is initialized to the C
data segment. This allows you to access global variables from within an
interrupt function.

In addition, all registers except SS are saved on the stack. You can access
these registers within the function if you declare a function parameter list
containing a formal parameter for each saved register. The following example
illustrates such a declaration:

    void _interrupt _far int_handler( unsigned _es, unsigned _ds,
                                    unsigned _di, unsigned _si,
                                    unsigned _bp, unsigned _sp,
                                    unsigned _bx, unsigned _dx,
                                    unsigned _cx, unsigned _ax,
                                    unsigned _ip, unsigned _cs,
                                    unsigned _flags )
    {
    .
    .
    .
    }

The formal parameters must appear in the opposite order from which they are
pushed onto the stack. You can omit parameters from the end of the list in a
declaration, but not from the beginning. For example, if your handler needs
to use only DI and SI, you must still provide ES and DS, but not necessarily
BX or DX.

You can pass additional arguments if your interrupt handler will be called
directly from C rather than by an INT instruction. To do this, you must
declare all register parameters and then declare your parameter at the end
of the list.

The compiler always saves and restores registers in the same, fixed order.
Thus, no matter what names you use in the formal parameter list, the first
parameter in the list refers to ES, the second refers to DS, and so on. If
your interrupt routines will use in-line assembler, you should distinguish
the parameter names so that they will not be the same as the real register
names.

If you change any of the register parameters of an interrupt function while
the function is executing, the corresponding register contains the changed
value when the function returns. For example:

    void _interrupt _far int_handler( unsigned _es, unsigned _ds,
                                    unsigned _di, unsigned _si )
    {
        _di = -1;
    }

This code causes the DI register to contain -1 when the handler function
returns. It is not a good idea to modify the values of the parameters
representing the IP and CS registers in interrupt functions. If you must
modify a particular flag (such as the carry flag for certain DOS and BIOS
interrupt routines), use the OR operator ( | ) so that other bits in the
flag register are not changed.

When an interrupt function is called by an INT instruction, the
interrupt-enable flag is cleared. If your interrupt function needs to do
significant processing, you should use the _enable function to set the
interrupt flag so that interrupts can be handled.


Precautions for Interrupt Functions

Since DOS is not reentrant (a DOS interrupt cannot be called from inside a
DOS interrupt), it is usually not safe to call from inside an interrupt
function any standard library function that calls DOS INT 21H. Similar
precautions apply to many BIOS functions. Functions that rely on INT 21H
calls include I/O functions and the _dos family of functions. Functions that
rely on the machine's BIOS include graphics functions and the _bios family
of functions. It is usually safe to use functions that do not rely on INT
21H or BIOS, such as string-handling functions. Before using a standard
library function in an interrupt function, be sure that you are familiar
with the action of the library function.


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_chain_intr,  _dos_getvect,  _dos_keep





_dos_write
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Writes a buffer to a file, using system call INT 0x40.

    #include <dos.h>

    unsigned _dos_write( int handle, void _far *buffer, unsigned count,
    unsigned *numwrt );

handle                            File to write to

buffer                            Buffer to write from

count                             Number of bytes to write

numwrt                            Number of bytes actually written


Remarks

The _dos_write routine uses system call INT 0x40 to write data to the file
that handle references; count bytes of data from the buffer to which buffer
points are written to the file. The integer pointed to by numwrt will be the
number of bytes actually written, which may be less than the number
requested.

Do not use the DOS interface routines with the console, low-level, or stream
I/O routines.


Return Value

If successful, the function returns 0. Otherwise, it returns the DOS error
code and sets errno to one of the following manifest constants:

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EACCES                            Access denied (handle references a file
                                    not open for write
                                    access)

EBADF                             Invalid file handle


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_dos_close,  _dos_open,  _dos_read, write


Example

    /* DWRITE.C: This program uses DOS I/O functions to write to a file. */

    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    void main()
    {
        char out_buffer[] = "Hello";
        int  fh;
        unsigned n_written;

        /* Open file with _dos_creat function */
        if( _dos_creat( "data", _A_NORMAL, &fh ) == 0 )
        {
        /* Write data with _dos_write function */
        _dos_write( fh, out_buffer, 5, &n_written );
        printf( "Number of characters written: %d\n", n_written );

        _dos_close( fh );
        printf( "Contents of file are:\n" );
        system( "type data" );
        }
    }


Output



    Number of characters written: 5
    Contents of file are:
    Hello





dosexterr
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets register values returned by INT 0x59.

    #include <dos.h>

    int dosexterr( struct DOSERROR *errorinfo );

errorinfo                         Extended DOS error information


Remarks

The dosexterr function obtains the extended error information returned by
the DOS system call INT 0x59 and stores the values in the structure pointed
to by errorinfo. This function is useful when making system calls under DOS
versions 3.0 or later, which offer extended error handling.

The structure type DOSERROR is defined in DOS.H. The DOSERROR structure
contains the following elements:

Element                           Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
int exterror                      AX register contents

char class                        BH register contents

char action                       BL register contents

char locus                        CH register contents

Giving a NULL pointer argument causes dosexterr to return the value in AX
without filling in the structure fields. See MS-DOS Encyclopedia  (Duncan,
ed.; Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 1988) or Programmer's PC Sourcebook
(Hogan; Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 1988) for more information on the
register contents.


Return Value

The dosexterr function returns the value in the AX register (identical to
the value in the exterror structure field).


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX


The dosexterr function should be used only under DOS versions 3.0 or later.



See Also

perror


Example

    /* DOSEXERR.C: This program tries to open the file test.dat. If the
    * attempted open operation fails, the program uses dosexterr to display
    * extended error information.
    */

    #include <dos.h>
    #include <io.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        struct DOSERROR doserror;
        int fd;

        /* Attempt to open a non-existent file */
        if( (fd = open( "NOSUCHF.ILE", O_RDONLY )) == -1 )
        {
        dosexterr( &doserror );
        printf( "Error: %d  Class: %d  Action: %d  Locus: %d\n",
                doserror.exterror, doserror.class,
                doserror.action,   doserror.locus );
        }
        else
        {
        printf( "Open succeeded so no extended information printed\n" );
        close( fd );
        }
    }


Output



    Error: 2  Class: 8  Action: 3  Locus: 2





dup, dup2
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Create a second handle for an open file (dup), or reassign a file handle
(dup2).

#include <io.h                    Required only for function declarations

    int dup( int handle );

    int dup2( int handle1, int handle2 );

handle, handle1                   Handle referring to open file

handle2                           Any handle value


Remarks

The dup and dup2 functions cause a second file handle to be associated with
a currently open file. Operations on the file can be carried out using
either file handle. The type of access allowed for the file is unaffected by
the creation of a new handle.

The dup function returns the next available file handle for the given file.
The dup2 function forces handle2 to refer to the same file as handle1. If
handle2 is associated with an open file at the time of the call, that file
is closed.


Return Value

The dup function returns a new file handle. The dup2 function returns 0 to
indicate success. Both functions return -1 if an error occurs and set errno
to one of the following values:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EBADF                             Invalid file handle

EMFILE                            No more file handles available (too many
                                    open files)


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

close, creat, open


Example

    /* DUP.C: This program uses the variable old to save the original stdout.
    * It then opens a new file named new and forces stdout to refer
    * to it. Finally, it restores stdout to its original state.
    */

    #include <io.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    void main()
    {
        int old;
        FILE *new;

        old = dup( 1 );   /* "old" now refers to "stdout" */
                        /* Note:  file handle 1 == "stdout" */
        if( old == -1 )
        {
        perror( "dup( 1 ) failure" );
        exit( 1 );
        }
        write( old, "This goes to stdout first\r\n", 27 );
        if( ( new = fopen( "data", "w" ) ) == NULL )
        {
        puts( "Can't open file 'data'\n" );
        exit( 1 );
        }

        /* stdout now refers to file "data" */
        if( -1 == dup2( fileno( new ), 1 ) )
        {
        perror( "Can't dup2 stdout" );
        exit( 1 );
        }
        puts( "This goes to file 'data'\r\n" );

        /* Flush stdout stream buffer so it goes to correct file */
        fflush( stdout );
        fclose( new );

        /* Restore original stdout */
        dup2( old, 1 );
        puts( "This goes to stdout\n" );
        puts( "The file 'data' contains:" );
        system( "type data" );
    }


Output



    This goes to stdout first
    This goes to stdout

    The file 'data' contains:
    This goes to file 'data'





ecvt
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Converts a double number to a string.

#include <stdlib.h>               Required only for function declarations

    char *ecvt( double value, int count, int *dec, int *sign );

value                             Number to be converted

count                             Number of digits stored

dec                               Stored decimal-point position

sign                              Sign of converted number


Remarks

The ecvt function converts a floating-point number to a character string.
The value argument is the floating-point number to be converted. The ecvt
function stores up to count digits of value as a string and appends a null
character ('\0'). If the number of digits in value exceeds count, the
low-order digit is rounded. If there are fewer than count digits, the string
is padded with zeros.

Only digits are stored in the string. The position of the decimal point and
the sign of value can be obtained from dec and sign after the call. The dec
argument points to an integer value giving the position of the decimal point
with respect to the beginning of the string. A 0 or negative integer value
indicates that the decimal point lies to the left of the first digit. The
sign argument points to an integer indicating the sign of the converted
number. If the integer value is 0, the number is positive. Otherwise, the
number is negative.

The ecvt and fcvt functions use a single statically allocated buffer for the
conversion. Each call to one of these routines destroys the result of the
previous call.


Return Value

The ecvt function returns a pointer to the string of digits. There is no
error return.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

atof, atoi, atol, fcvt, gcvt


Example

    /* ECVT.C: This program uses ecvt to convert a floating-point
    * number to a character string.
    */

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int     decimal, sign;
        char    *buffer;
        int     precision = 10;
        double  source = 3.1415926535;

        buffer = ecvt( source, precision, &decimal, &sign );
        printf( "source: %2.10f   buffer: '%s'  decimal: %d   sign: %d\n",
                source, buffer, decimal, sign );
    }


Output



    source: 3.1415926535   buffer: '3141592654'  decimal: 1   sign: 0





_ellipse Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Draw ellipses.

    #include <graph.h>

    short _far _ellipse( short control, short x1, short y1, short x2, short y2
    );

    short _far _ellipse_w( short control, double wx1, double wy1, double wx2,
    double wy2 );

    short _far _ellipse_wxy( short control, struct _wxycoord _far *pwxy1,
    struct _wxycoord _far *pwxy2 );

control                           Fill flag

x1, y1                            Upper-left corner of bounding rectangle

x2, y2                            Lower-right corner of bounding rectangle

wx1, wy1                          Upper-left corner of bounding rectangle

wx2, wy2                          Lower-right corner of bounding rectangle

pwxy1                             Upper-left corner of bounding rectangle

pwxy2                             Lower-right corner of bounding rectangle


Remarks

The _ellipse functions draw ellipses or circles. The borders are drawn in
the current color. In the _ellipse function, the center of the ellipse is
the center of the bounding rectangle defined by the view-coordinate points
(x1, y1) and (x2, y2).

In the _ellipse_w function, the center of the ellipse is the center of the
bounding rectangle defined by the window-coordinate points (wx1, wy1) and
(wx2, wy2).

In the _ellipse_wxy function, the center of the ellipse is the center of the
bounding rectangle defined by the window-coordinate pairs (pwxy1) and
(pwxy2).

If the bounding-rectangle arguments define a point or a vertical or
horizontal line, no figure is drawn.

The control argument can be one of the following manifest constants:

Constant                          Action
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_GFILLINTERIOR                    Fills the ellipse using the current fill
                                    mask

_GBORDER                          Does not fill the ellipse

The control option given by _GFILLINTERIOR is equivalent to a subsequent
call to the _floodfill function, using the center of the ellipse as the
starting point and the current color (set by _setcolor) as the boundary
color.


Return Value

The _ellipse functions return a nonzero value if the ellipse is drawn
successfully; otherwise, they return 0.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_arc functions,  _floodfill,  _grstatus,  _lineto functions,  _pie
functions, _polygon functions,  _rectangle functions,  _setcolor,
_setfillmask


Example

    /* ELLIPSE.C: This program draws a simple ellipse. */

    #include <conio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <graph.h>

    void main()
    {
        /* Find a valid graphics mode. */
        if( !_setvideomode( _MAXRESMODE ) )
        exit( 1 );

        _ellipse( _GFILLINTERIOR, 80, 50, 240, 150 );

        /* Strike any key to clear screen. */
        getch();
        _setvideomode( _DEFAULTMODE );
    }





_enable
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Enables interrupts.

    #include <dos.h>

    void _enable( void );


Remarks

The _enable routine enables interrupts by executing an 8086 STI machine
instruction.


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_disable





_endthread
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Terminates an OS/2 thread.

#include <process.h>              Multithread version of PROCESS.H

    void _far _endthread( void );


Description

The _endthread function terminates a thread created by _beginthread.

Because threads terminate automatically, the _endthread function is normally
not required. It is used to terminate a thread conditionally.

The OS/2 function DosExit should not be used to terminate threads created by
the _beginthread function. If DosExit is used, the results are
unpredictable.


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI  ▼ DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_beginthread


Example

See the example for _beginthread.





eof
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Tests for end-of-file.

#include <io.h>                   Required only for function declarations

    int eof( int handle );

handle                            Handle referring to open file


Remarks

The eof function determines whether the end of the file associated with
handle has been reached.


Return Value

The eof function returns the value 1 if the current position is end-of-file,
or 0 if it is not. A return value of -1 indicates an error; in this case,
errno is set to EBADF, indicating an invalid file handle.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

clearerr, feof, ferror, perror


Example

    /* EOF.C: This program reads data from a file ten bytes at a time
    * until the end of the file is reached or an error is encountered.
    */

    #include <io.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        int  fh, count, total = 0;
        char buf[10];

        if( (fh = open( "eof.c", O_RDONLY )) == - 1 )
        exit( 1 );

    /* Cycle until end of file reached: */
        while( !eof( fh ) )
        {
        /* Attempt to read in 10 bytes: */
        if( (count = read( fh, buf, 10 )) == -1 )
        {
            perror( "Read error" );
            break;
        }

        /* Total up actual bytes read */
        total += count;
        }
        printf( "Number of bytes read = %d\n", total );
        close( fh );
    }


Output



    Number of bytes read = 715





exec Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Load and execute new child processes.

#include <process.h>              Required only for function declarations

    int execl( char *cmdname, char *arg0, ... char *argn, NULL );

    int execle( char *cmdname, char *arg0, ... char *argn, NULL,
    char **envp );

    int execlp( char *cmdname, char *arg0, ... char *argn, NULL  );

    int execlpe( char *cmdname, char *arg0, ... char *argn, NULL,
    char **envp  );

    int execv( char *cmdname, char **argv );

    int execve( char *cmdname, char **argv, char **envp );

    int execvp( char *cmdname, char **argv );

    int execvpe( char *cmdname, char **argv, char **envp );

cmdname                           Path name of file to be executed

arg0, ... argn                    List of pointers to arguments

argv                              Array of pointers to arguments

envp                              Array of pointers to environment
                                    settings


Remarks

The exec functions load and execute new child processes. When the call is
successful in DOS, the child process is placed in the memory previously
occupied by the calling process. Under OS/2, calling an exec function is
equivalent to calling the corresponding function with the P_NOWAITO argument
specified, followed by a call to the exit function. Sufficient memory must
be available for loading and executing the child process.

All of the exec functions use the same operating system function. The
letter(s) at the end of the function name determine the specific variation,
as shown in the following list:

Letter                            Variation
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
e                                 An array of pointers to environment
                                    arguments is explicitly passed to the
                                    child process.

l                                 Command-line arguments are passed
                                    individually to the exec function.

p                                 Uses the PATH environment variable to
                                    find the file to be
                                    executed.

v                                 Command-line arguments are passed to the
                                    exec function as an array of pointers.

The cmdname argument specifies the file to be executed as the child process.
It can specify a full path (from the root), a partial path (from the current
working directory), or just a file name. If cmdname does not have a
file-name extension or does not end with a period (.), the exec function
searches for the named file; if the search is unsuccessful, it tries the
same base name, first with the extension .COM, then with the extension .EXE.
If cmdname has an extension, only that extension is used in the search. If
cmdname ends with a period, the exec calls search for cmdname with no
extension. The execlp, execlpe, execvp, and execvpe routines search for
cmdname (using the same procedures) in the directories specified by the PATH
environment variable.

If cmdname contains a drive specifier or any slashes (i.e., if it is a
relative path name), the exec call searches only for the specified file and
no path searching is done.

Arguments are passed to the new process by giving one or more pointers to
character strings as arguments in the exec call. These character strings
form the argument list for the child process. The combined length of the
strings forming the argument list for the new process must not exceed 128
bytes (in real mode only). The terminating null character ('\0') for each
string is not included in the count, but space characters (inserted
automatically to separate the arguments) are counted.

The argument pointers can be passed as separate arguments (execl, execle,
execlp, and execlpe) or as an array of pointers (execv, execve, execvp, and
execvpe). At least one argument, arg0, must be passed to the child process;
this argument is argv[0] of the child process. Usually, this argument is a
copy of the cmdname argument. (A different value will not produce an error.)
Under versions of DOS earlier than 3.0, the passed value of arg0 is not
available for use in the child process. However, under OS/2 and under DOS
versions 3.0 and later, cmdname is available as arg0.

The execl, execle, execlp, and execlpe calls are typically used when the
number of arguments is known in advance. The argument arg0 is usually a
pointer to cmdname. The arguments arg1 through argn point to the character
strings forming the new argument list. A null pointer must follow argn to
mark the end of the argument list.

The execv, execve, execvp, and execvpe calls are useful when the number of
arguments to the new process is variable. Pointers to the arguments are
passed as an array, argv. The argument argv[0] is usually a pointer to
cmdname. The arguments argv[1] through argv[n] point to the character
strings forming the new argument list. The argument argv[n+1] must be a NULL
pointer to mark the end of the argument list.

Files that are open when an exec call is made remain open in the new
process. In the execl, execlp, execv, and execvp calls, the child process
inherits the environment of the parent. The execle, execlpe, execve, and
execvpe calls allow the user to alter the environment for the child process
by passing a list of environment settings through the envp argument. The
argument envp is an array of character pointers, each element of which
(except for the final element) points to a null-terminated string defining
an environment variable. Such a string usually has the form

NAME=value

where NAME is the name of an environment variable and value is the string
value to which that variable is set. (Note that value is not enclosed in
double quotation marks.) The final element of the envp array should be NULL.
When envp itself is NULL, the child process inherits the environment
settings of the parent process.

A program executed with one of the exec family of functions is always loaded
into memory as if the "maximum allocation" field in the program's .EXE file
header is set to the default value of 0FFFFH. You can use the EXEMOD utility
to change the maximum allocation field of a program; however, such a program
invoked with one of the exec functions may behave differently from a program
invoked directly from the operating-system command line or with one of the
spawn functions.

The exec calls do not preserve the translation modes of open files. If the
child process must use files inherited from the parent, the setmode routine
should be used to set the translation mode of these files to the desired
mode.

You must explicitly flush (using fflush or flushall) or close any stream
prior to the exec function call.

Signal settings are not preserved in child processes that are created by
calls to exec routines. The signal settings are reset to the default in the
child process.


Return Value

The exec functions do not normally return to the calling process. If an exec
function returns, an error has occurred and the return value is -1. The
errno variable is set to one of the following values:

Value                             Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
E2BIG                             The argument list exceeds 128 bytes, or
                                    the space required for the environment
                                    information exceeds 32K.

EACCES                            The specified file has a locking or
                                    sharing violation
                                    (OS/2, and DOS versions 3.0 or later).

EMFILE                            Too many files open (the specified file
                                    must be opened to determine whether it
                                    is executable).

ENOENT                            File or path name not found.

ENOEXEC                           The specified file is not executable or
                                    has an invalid
                                    executable-file format.

ENOMEM                            Not enough memory is available to
                                    execute the child process; or the
                                    available memory has been corrupted; or
                                    an invalid block exists, indicating that
                                    the parent process was not allocated
                                    properly.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


Because of differences in DOS versions 2.0 and 2.1, child processes
generated by the exec family of functions (or by the equivalent spawn
functions with the P_OVERLAY argument) may cause fatal system errors when
they exit. If you are running DOS 2.0 or 2.1, you must upgrade to DOS
version 3.0 or later to use these functions.

Bound programs cannot use the exec family of functions in real mode.


See Also

abort, atexit, exit, _exit, onexit, spawn functions, system


Example

    /* EXEC.C: This program accepts a number in the range 1 through 8 from the
    * command line. Based on the number it receives, it executes one of the
    * eight different procedures that spawn the process named child. For
    * some of these procedures, the child.exe file must be in the same
    * directory; for others, it need only be in the same path.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <process.h>

    char *my_env[] = {
                "THIS=environment will be",
                "PASSED=to child.exe by the",
                "EXECLE=and",
                "EXECLPE=and",
                "EXECVE=and",
                "EXECVPE=functions",
                NULL
                };

    void main( int argc, char *argv[] )
    {
        char *args[4];
        int result;

        args[0] = "child";     /* Set up parameters to send */
        args[1] = "execv??";
        args[2] = "two";
        args[3] = NULL;

    switch( argv[1][0] )   /* Based on first letter of argument */
        {
        case '1':
            execl( argv[2], argv[2], "execl", "two", NULL );
            break;
        case '2':
            execle( argv[2], argv[2], "execle", "two", NULL, my_env );
            break;
        case '3':
            execlp( argv[2], argv[2], "execlp", "two", NULL );
            break;
        case '4':
            execlpe( argv[2], argv[2], "execlpe", "two", NULL, my_env );
            break;
        case '5':
            execv( argv[2], args );
            break;
        case '6':
            execve( argv[2], args, my_env );
            break;
        case '7':
            execvp( argv[2], args );
            break;
        case '8':
            execvpe( argv[2], args, my_env );
            break;
        default:
            printf( "SYNTAX: EXEC <1-8> <childprogram>\n" );
            exit( 1 );
        }
        printf( "Process was not spawned.\n" );
        printf( "Program 'child' was not found." );
    }





exit, _exit
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Terminate the calling process after cleanup (exit) or immediately ( _exit).


#include <process.h>              Required only for function declarations

#include <stdlib.h>               Use either PROCESS.H or STDLIB.H

    void exit( int status );

    void _exit( int status );

status                            Exit status


Remarks

The exit and _exit functions terminate the calling process. The exit
function first calls, in LIFO (last-in-first-out) order, the functions
registered by atexit and onexit, then flushes all file buffers before
terminating the process. The _exit function terminates the process without
processing atexit or onexit functions or flushing stream buffers. The status
value is typically set to 0 to indicate a normal exit and set to some other
value to indicate an error.

Although the exit and _exit calls do not return a value, the low-order byte
of status is made available to the waiting parent process, if one exists,
after the calling process exits. The status value is available to the
operating-system batch command ERRORLEVEL.

The behavior of the exit, _exit, _cexit, and _c_exit functions is as
follows:

Function                          Action
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
exit                              Performs complete C library termination
                                    procedures, terminates the process, and
                                    exits with the supplied status code.

_exit                             Performs "quick" C library termination
                                    procedures, terminates the process, and
                                    exits with the supplied status code.

_cexit                            Performs complete C library termination
                                    procedures and returns to caller, but
                                    does not terminate the process.

_c_exit                           Performs "quick" C library termination
                                    procedures and returns to caller, but
                                    does not terminate the process.


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

exit

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


_exit

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

abort, atexit, _cexit, exec functions, onexit, spawn functions, system


Example

    /* EXITER.C: This program prompts the user for a yes or no and returns
    * a DOS error code of 1 if the user answers Y or y; otherwise it
    * returns 0. The error code could be tested in a batch file.
    */

    #include <conio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        char  ch;

        cputs( "Yes or no? " );
        ch = getch();
        cputs( "\r\n" );
        if( toupper( ch ) == 'Y' )
        exit( 1 );
        else
        exit( 0 );
    }





exp, expl
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate the exponential.

    #include <math.h>

    double exp( double x );

    long double expl( long double x );

x                                 Floating-point value


Remarks

The exp and expl functions return the exponential function of their
floating-point arguments (x).

The expl function is the 80-bit counterpart; it uses an 80-bit, 10-byte
coprocessor form of arguments and return values. See the reference page on
the long double functions for more details on this data type.


Return Value

These functions return ex. The functions return HUGE_VAL on overflow and set
errno to ERANGE; on underflow, they return 0 but do not set errno.


Compatibility

exp

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


expl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

log functions


Example

    /* EXP.C */
    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        double x = 2.302585093, y;

        y = exp( x );
        printf( "exp( %f ) = %f\n", x, y );
    }


Output



    exp( 2.302585 ) = 10.000000





_expand Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Changes the size of a memory block.

#include <malloc.h>               Required only for function declarations

    void *_expand( void *memblock, size_t size );

    void _based( void ) *_bexpand( _segment seg, void _based( void )
    *memblock,
    size_t size );

    void _far *_fexpand( void _far *memblock, size_t size );

    void _near *_nexpand( void _near *memblock, size_t size );

memblock                          Pointer to previously allocated memory
                                    block

size                              New size in bytes

seg                               Value of base segment


Remarks

The _expand family of functions changes the size of a previously allocated
memory block by attempting to expand or contract the block without moving
its location in the heap. The memblock argument points to the beginning of
the block. The size argument gives the new size of the block, in bytes. The
contents of the block are unchanged up to the shorter of the new and old
sizes.

The memblock argument can also point to a block that has been freed, as long
as there has been no intervening call to calloc, _expand, malloc, or
realloc. If memblock points to a freed block, the block remains free after a
call to one of the _expand functions.

The seg argument is the segment address of the _based heap.

In large data models (compact-, large-, and huge-model programs), _expand
maps to _fexpand. In small data models ( tiny-, small-, and medium-model
programs), expand maps to _nexpand.

The various _expand functions change the size of the storage block in the
data segments shown in the list below:

Function                          Data Segment
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
_expand                           Depends on data model of program

_bexpand                          Based heap specified by seg, or in all
                                    based heaps if seg
                                    is zero

_fexpand                          Far heap (outside default data segment)

_nexpand                          Near heap (inside default data segment)


Return Value

The _expand family of functions returns a void pointer to the reallocated
memory block. Unlike realloc, _expand cannot move a block to change its
size. This means the memblock argument to _expand is the same as the return
value if there is sufficient memory available to expand the block without
moving it.

With the exception of the _bexpand function, these functions return NULL if
there is insufficient memory available to expand the block to the given size
without moving it. The _bexpand function returns _NULLOFF if insufficient
memory is available. The item pointed to by memblock will have been expanded
as much as possible in its current location.

The storage space pointed to by the return value is guaranteed to be
suitably aligned for storage of any type of object. The new size of the item
can be checked with the _msize function. To get a pointer to a type other
than void, use a type cast on the return value.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

calloc functions, free functions, malloc functions, _msize functions,
realloc functions


Example

    /* EXPAND.C */
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <malloc.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        char *bufchar;

        printf( "Allocate a 512 element buffer\n" );
        if( (bufchar = (char *)calloc( 512, sizeof( char ) )) == NULL )
        exit( 1 );
        printf( "Allocated %d bytes at %Fp\n",
            _msize( bufchar ), (void _far *)bufchar );

        if( (bufchar = (char *)_expand( bufchar, 1024 )) == NULL )
        printf( "Can't expand" );
        else
        printf( "Expanded block to %d bytes at %Fp\n",
                _msize( bufchar ), (void _far *)bufchar );

        /* Free memory */
        free( bufchar );
        exit( 0 );
    }


Output



    Allocate a 512 element buffer
    Allocated 512 bytes at 0067:142A
    Expanded block to 1024 bytes at 0067:142A





fabs, fabsl
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate the absolute value of their floating-point arguments.

    #include <math.h>

    double fabs( double x );

    long double fabsl( long double x );

x                                 Floating-point value


Remarks

The fabs and fabsl functions calculate the absolute value of their
floating-point arguments.

The fabsl function is the 80-bit counterpart; it uses an 80-bit, 10-byte
coprocessor form of arguments and return values. See the reference page on
the long double functions for more details on this data type.


Return Value

These functions return the absolute value of their arguments. There is no
error return.


Compatibility

fabs

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


fabsl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

abs, cabs, labs


Example

    /* ABS.C: This program computes and displays the absolute values of
    * several numbers.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        int    ix = -4, iy;
        long   lx = -41567L, ly;
        double dx = -3.141593, dy;

        iy = abs( ix );
        printf( "The absolute value of %d is %d\n", ix, iy);

        ly = labs( lx );
        printf( "The absolute value of %ld is %ld\n", lx, ly);

        dy = fabs( dx );
        printf( "The absolute value of %f is %f\n", dx, dy );
    }


Output



    The absolute value of -4 is 4
    The absolute value of -41567 is 41567
    The absolute value of -3.141593 is 3.141593





fclose, fcloseall
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Closes a stream (fclose) or closes all open streams (fcloseall).

    #include <stdio.h>

    int fclose( FILE *stream );

    int fcloseall( void );

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The fclose function closes stream. The fcloseall function closes all open
streams except stdin, stdout, stderr (and in DOS, stdaux and stdprn). It
also closes and deletes any temporary files created by tmpfile.

In both functions, all buffers associated with the stream are flushed prior
to closing. System-allocated buffers are released when the stream is closed.
Buffers assigned by the user with setbuf and setvbuf are not automatically
released.


Return Value

The fclose function returns 0 if the stream is successfully closed. The
fcloseall function returns the total number of streams closed. Both
functions return EOF to indicate an error.


Compatibility

fclose

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


fcloseall

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

close, fdopen, fflush, fopen, freopen


Example

    /* FOPEN.C: This program opens files named "data" and "data2". It uses
    * fclose to close "data" and fcloseall to close all remaining files.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    FILE *stream, *stream2;

    void main()
    {
        int numclosed;

        /* Open for read (will fail if 'data does not exist) */
        if( (stream  = fopen( "data", "r" )) == NULL )
        printf( "The file 'data' was not opened\n" );
        else
        printf( "The file 'data' was opened\n" );

        /* Open for write */
        if( (stream2 = fopen( "data2", "w+" )) == NULL )
        printf( "The file 'data2' was not opened\n" );
        else
        printf( "The file 'data2' was opened\n" );

        /* Close stream */
        if( fclose( stream ) )
        printf( "The file 'data' was not closed\n" );

        /* All other files are closed: */
        numclosed = fcloseall( );
        printf( "Number of files closed by fcloseall: %u\n", numclosed );
    }


Output



    The file 'data' was opened
    The file 'data2' was opened
    Number of files closed by fcloseall: 1





fcvt
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Converts a floating-point number to a string.

#include <stdlib.h>               Required only for function declarations

    char *fcvt( double value, int count, int *dec, int *sign );

value                             Number to be converted

count                             Number of digits after decimal point

dec                               Pointer to stored decimal-point position

sign                              Pointer to stored sign indicator


Remarks

The fcvt function converts a floating-point number to a null-terminated
character string. The value argument is the floating-point number to be
converted. The fcvt function stores the digits of value as a string and
appends a null character ('\0'). The count argument specifies the number of
digits to be stored after the decimal point. Excess digits are rounded off
to count places. If there are fewer than count digits of precision, the
string is padded with zeros.

Only digits are stored in the string. The position of the decimal point and
the sign of value can be obtained from dec and sign after the call. The dec
argument points to an integer value; this integer value gives the position
of the decimal point with respect to the beginning of the string. A zero or
negative integer value indicates that the decimal point lies to the left of
the first digit. The argument sign points to an integer indicating the sign
of value. The integer is set to 0 if value is positive and is set to a
nonzero number if value is negative.

The ecvt and fcvt functions use a single statically allocated buffer for the
conversion. Each call to one of these routines destroys the results of the
previous call.


Return Value

The fcvt function returns a pointer to the string of digits. There is no
error return.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

atof, atoi, atol, ecvt, gcvt


Example

    /* FCVT.C: This program converts the constant 3.1415926535 to a string and
    * sets the pointer *buffer to point to that string.
    */

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int  decimal, sign;
        char *buffer;
        double source = 3.1415926535;

        buffer = fcvt( source, 7, &decimal, &sign );
        printf( "source: %2.10f   buffer: '%s'   decimal: %d   sign: %d\n",
                source, buffer, decimal, sign );
    }


Output



    source: 3.1415926535   buffer: '31415927'   decimal: 1   sign: 0





fdopen
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Opens a stream using a handle.

    #include <stdio.h>

    FILE *fdopen( int handle, char *mode );

handle                            Handle referring to open file

mode                              Type of access permitted


Remarks

The fdopen function associates an input/output stream with the file
identified by handle, thus allowing a file opened for "low-level" I/O to be
buffered and formatted. (See Section 2.7, "Input and Output," for an
explanation of stream I/O and low-level I/O.) The mode character string
specifies the type of access requested for the file, as shown below. The
following list gives the mode string used in the fopen and fdopen functions
and the corresponding oflag arguments used in the open and sopen functions.
A complete description of the mode string argument is given in the remarks
section of the fopen function.

Type String                       Equivalent Value for open/sopen
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
"r"                               O_RDONLY

"w"                               O_WRONLY (usually O_WRONLY | O_CREAT |
                                    O_TRUNC)

"a"                               O_WRONLY | O_APPEND (usually O_WRONLY |
                                    O_CREAT | O_APPEND)

"r+"                              O_RDWR

"w+"                              O_RDWR (usually O_RDWR | O_CREAT |
                                    O_TRUNC)

"a+"                              O_RDWR | O_APPEND (usually O_RDWR |
                                    O_APPEND | O_CREAT )

In addition to the values listed above, one of the following characters can
be included in the mode string to specify the translation mode for newlines.
These characters correspond to the constants used in the open and sopen
functions, as shown below:

Mode                              Equivalent Value for open/sopen
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
t                                 O_TEXT

b                                 O_BINARY

If t or b is not given in the mode string, the translation mode is defined
by the default-mode variable _fmode.

The t option is not part of the ANSI standard for fopen and fpopen, but is
instead a Microsoft extension and should not be used where ANSI portability
is desired.


Return Value

The fdopen function returns a pointer to the open stream. A null pointer
value indicates an error.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

dup, dup2, fclose, fcloseall, fopen, freopen, open


Example

    /* FDOPEN.C: This program opens a file using low-level I/O, then uses
    * fdopen to switch to stream access. It counts the lines in the file.
    */

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <io.h>

    void main()
    {
        FILE *stream;
        int  fh, count = 0;
        char inbuf[128];

        /* Open a file handle. */
        if( (fh = open( "fdopen.c", O_RDONLY )) == -1 )
        exit( 1 );

        /* Change handle access to stream access. */
        if( (stream = fdopen( fh, "r" )) == NULL )
        exit( 1 );

        while( fgets( inbuf, 128, stream ) != NULL )
        count++;

    /* After fdopen, close with fclose, not close. */
        fclose( stream );

        printf( "Lines in file: %d\n", count );
    }


Output



    Lines in file: 31





feof
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Tests for end-of-file on a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    int feof( FILE *stream );

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The feof routine (implemented as a macro) determines whether the end of
stream has been reached. Once the end of the file is reached, read
operations return an end-of-file indicator until the stream is closed or
until rewind, fsetpos, fseek, or clearerr is called against it.


Return Value

The feof function returns a nonzero value after the first read operation
that attempts to read past the end of the file. It returns 0 if the current
position is not end-of-file. There is no error return.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

clearerr, eof, ferror, perror


Example

    /* FEOF.C: This program uses feof to indicate when it reaches the end
    * of the file FEOF.C. It also checks for errors with ferror.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        int  count, total = 0;
        char buffer[100];
        FILE *stream;

        if( (stream = fopen( "feof.c", "r" )) == NULL )
        exit( 1 );

    /* Cycle until end of file reached: */
        while( !feof( stream ) )
        {
        /* Attempt to read in 10 bytes: */
        count = fread( buffer, sizeof( char ), 100, stream );
        if( ferror( stream ) )
        {
            perror( "Read error" );
            break;
        }

        /* Total up actual bytes read */
        total += count;
        }
        printf( "Number of bytes read = %d\n", total );
        fclose( stream );
    }


Output



    Number of bytes read = 697





ferror
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Tests for an error on a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    int ferror( FILE *stream );

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The ferror routine (implemented as a macro) tests for a reading or writing
error on the file associated with stream. If an error has occurred, the
error indicator for the stream remains set until the stream is closed or
rewound, or until clearerr is called against it.


Return Value

If no error has occurred on stream, ferror returns 0. Otherwise, it returns
a nonzero value.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

clearerr, eof, feof, fopen, perror


Example

    /* FEOF.C: This program uses feof to indicate when it reaches the end
    * of the file FEOF.C. It also checks for errors with ferror.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        int  count, total = 0;
        char buffer[100];
        FILE *stream;

        if( (stream = fopen( "feof.c", "r" )) == NULL )
        exit( 1 );

    /* Cycle until end of file reached: */
        while( !feof( stream ) )
        {
        /* Attempt to read in 10 bytes: */
        count = fread( buffer, sizeof( char ), 100, stream );
        if( ferror( stream ) )
        {
            perror( "Read error" );
            break;
        }

        /* Total up actual bytes read */
        total += count;
        }
        printf( "Number of bytes read = %d\n", total );
        fclose( stream );
    }


Output



    Number of bytes read = 697





fflush
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Flushes a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    int fflush( FILE *stream );

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

If the file associated with stream is open for output, fflush writes to that
file the contents of the buffer associated with the stream. If the stream is
open for input, fflush clears the contents of the buffer. The fflush
function negates the effect of any prior call to ungetc against stream.

Buffers are automatically flushed when they are full, when the stream is
closed, or when a program terminates normally without closing the stream.

The stream remains open after the call. The fflush function has no effect on
an unbuffered stream.


Return Value

The fflush function returns the value 0 if the buffer was successfully
flushed. The value 0 is also returned in cases in which the specified stream
has no buffer or is open for reading only. A return value of EOF indicates
an error.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

fclose, flushall, setbuf


Example

    /* FFLUSH.C */
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <conio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int integer;
        char string[81];

    /* Read each word as a string. */
        printf( "Enter a sentence of four words with scanf: " );
        for( integer = 0; integer < 4; integer++ )
        {
        scanf( "%s", string );
        printf( "%s\n", string );
        }

        /* You must flush the input buffer before using gets. */
        fflush( stdin );
        printf( "Enter the same sentence with gets: " );
        gets( string );
        printf( "%s\n", string );
    }


Output



    Enter a sentence of four words with scanf: This is a test
    This
    is
    a
    test
    Enter the same sentence with gets: This is a test
    This is a test





fgetc, fgetchar
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Read a character from a stream (fgetc) or stdin (fgetchar).

    #include <stdio.h>

    int fgetc( FILE *stream );

    int fgetchar( void );

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The fgetc function reads a single character from the current position of the
file associated with stream. The character is converted and returned as an
int. The function then increments the associated file pointer (if any) to
point to the next character. The fgetchar function is equivalent to
fgetc(stdin).

The fgetc and fgetchar routines are identical to getc and getchar, but they
are functions rather than macros.


Return Value

The fgetc and fgetchar functions return the character read. They return EOF
to indicate an error or end-of-file. Use feof or ferror to distinguish
between an error and an end-of-file condition.


Compatibility

fgetc

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


fgetchar

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

fputc, fputchar, getc, getchar


Example

    /* FGETC.C: This program uses getc to read the first 80 input characters
    * (or until the end of input) and place them into a string named buffer.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>

    void main()
    {
        FILE *stream;
        char buffer[81];
        int  i, ch;

        /* Open file to read line from: */
        if( (stream = fopen( "fgetc.c", "r" )) == NULL )
        exit( 0 );

        /* Read in first 80 characters and place them in "buffer": */
        ch = fgetc( stream );
        for( i=0; (i < 80 ) && ( feof( stream ) == 0 ); i++ )
        {
        buffer[i] = ch;
        ch = fgetc( stream );
        }
        /* Add null to end string */
        buffer[i] = '\0';
        printf( "%s\n", buffer );
        fclose( stream );
    }


Output



    /* FGETC.C: This program uses getc to read the first 80 input characters
    /* (or







fgetpos
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets a stream's file-position indicator.

    #include <stdio.h>

    int fgetpos( FILE *stream, fpos_t *pos );

stream                            Target stream

pos                               Position-indicator storage


Remarks

The fgetpos function gets the current value of the stream argument's
file-position indicator and stores it in the object pointed to by pos. The
fsetpos function can later use information stored in pos to reset the stream
argument's pointer to its position at the time fgetpos was called.

The pos value is stored in an internal format and is intended for use only
by the fgetpos and fsetpos functions.


Return Value

If successful, the fgetpos function returns 0. On failure, it returns a
nonzero value and sets errno to one of the following manifest constants
(defined in STDIO.H):

Constant                          Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
EBADF                             The specified stream is not a valid file
                                    handle or is not
                                    accessible.

EINVAL                            The stream value is invalid.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

fsetpos


Example

    /* FGETPOS.C: This program opens a file and reads bytes at several
    * different locations.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        FILE   *stream;
        fpos_t pos;
        int    val;
        char   buffer[20];

        if( (stream = fopen( "fgetpos.c", "rb" )) == NULL )
        printf( "Trouble opening file\n" );
        else
        {
        /* Read some data and then check the position. */
        fread( buffer, sizeof( char ), 10, stream );
        if( fgetpos( stream, &pos ) != 0 )
            perror( "fgetpos error" );
        else
        {
            fread( buffer, sizeof( char ), 10, stream );
            printf( "10 bytes at byte %ld: %.10s\n", pos, buffer );
        }

        /* Set a new position and read more data */
        pos = 140;
        if( fsetpos( stream, &pos ) != 0 )
            perror( "fsetpos error" );

        fread( buffer, sizeof( char ), 10, stream );
            printf( "10 bytes at byte %ld: %.10s\n", pos, buffer );

        fclose( stream );
        }
    }


Output



    10 bytes at byte 10: .C: This p
    10 bytes at byte 140:   FILE   *





fgets
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets a string from a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    char *fgets( char *string, int n, FILE *stream );

string                            Storage location for data

n                                 Number of characters stored

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The fgets function reads a string from the input stream argument and stores
it in string. Characters are read from the current stream position up to and
including the first newline character ('\n'), up to the end of the stream,
or until the number of characters read is equal to n - 1, whichever comes
first. The result is stored in string, and a null character ('\0') is
appended. The newline character, if read, is included in the string. If n is
equal to 1, string is empty (""). The fgets function is similar to the gets
function; however, gets replaces the newline character with NULL.


Return Value

If successful, the fgets function returns string. It returns NULL to
indicate either an error or end-of-file condition. Use feof or ferror to
determine whether an error occurred.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

fputs, gets, puts


Example

    /* FGETS.C: This program uses fgets to display a line from a file on the
    * screen.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    FILE *stream;

    void main()
    {
        char line[100], *result;

    if( (stream = fopen( "fgets.c", "r" )) != NULL )
        {
        if( fgets( line, 100, stream ) == NULL)
            printf( "fgets error\n" );
        else
            printf( "%s", line);
        fclose( stream );
        }
    }


Output



    /* FGETS.C: This program uses fgets to display a line from a file on the





fieeetomsbin, fmsbintoieee
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Convert floating-point numbers between IEEE and Microsoft binary formats.

    #include <math.h>

    int fieeetomsbin( float *src4,  float *dst4 );

    int fmsbintoieee(  float *src4,  float *dst4 );

scr4                              Value to be converted

dst4                              Converted value


Remarks

The fieeetomsbin routine converts a single-precision floating-point number
in IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers) format to
Microsoft (MS) binary format.

The fmsbintoieee routine converts a floating-point number in Microsoft
binary format to IEEE format.

These routines allow C programs (which store floating-point numbers in the
IEEE format) to use numeric data in random-access data files created with
Microsoft BASIC (which stores floating-point numbers in the Microsoft binary
format), and vice versa.

The argument src4 points to the float value to be converted. The result is
stored at the location given by dst4.

These routines do not handle IEEE NANs ("not a number") and infinities. IEEE
denormals are treated as 0 in the conversions.


Return Value

These functions return 0 if the conversion is successful and 1 if the
conversion causes an overflow.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

dieeetomsbin, dmsbintoieee





filelength
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets the length of a file.

#include <io.h>                   Required only for function declarations

    long filelength( int handle );

handle                            Target file handle


Remarks

The filelength function returns the length, in bytes, of the target file
associated with handle.


Return Value

The filelength function returns the file length in bytes. A return value of
-1L indicates an error, and an invalid handle sets errno to EBADF.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

chsize, fileno, fstat, stat


Example

    /* CHSIZE.C: This program uses filelength to report the size of a
    * file before and after modifying it with chsize.
    */

    #include <io.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <sys\types.h>
    #include <sys\stat.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int fh, result;
        unsigned int nbytes = BUFSIZ;

    /* Open a file */
        if( (fh = open( "data", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, S_IREAD | S_IWRITE )) != -1 )
        {
        printf( "File length before: %ld\n", filelength( fh ) );
        if( chsize( fh, 329678 ) == 0 )
            printf( "Size successfully changed\n" );
        else
            printf( "Problem in changing the size\n" );
        printf( "File length after:  %ld\n", filelength( fh ) );
        close( fh );
        }
    }


Output



    File length before: 0
    Size successfully changed
    File length after:  329678





fileno
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Gets the file handle associated with a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    int fileno( FILE *stream );

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The fileno routine returns the file handle currently associated with stream.
This routine is implemented as a macro.


Return Value

The fileno routine returns the file handle. There is no error return. The
result is undefined if stream does not specify an open file.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

fdopen, filelength, fopen, freopen


Example

    /* FILENO.C: This program uses fileno to obtain the file handle for
    * some standard C streams.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        printf( "The file handle for stdin is %d\n", fileno( stdin ) );
        printf( "The file handle for stdout is %d\n", fileno( stdout ) );
        printf( "The file handle for stderr is %d\n", fileno( stderr ) );
    }


Output



    The file handle for stdin is 0
    The file handle for stdout is 1
    The file handle for stderr is 2





_floodfill, _floodfill_w
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Fill an area of a display using the current color and fill mask

    #include <graph.h>

    short _far _floodfill( short x, short y, short boundary );

    short _far _floodfill_w( double wx, double wy, short boundary );

x, y                              Start point

wx, wy                            Start point

boundary                          Boundary color of area to be filled


Remarks

The functions in the _floodfill family fill an area of the display, using
the current color and fill mask. The _floodfill routine begins filling at
the view-coordinate point (x, y). The _floodfill_w routine begins filling at
the window-coordinate point (wx, wy).

If this point lies inside the figure, the interior is filled; if it lies
outside the figure, the background is filled. The point must be inside or
outside the figure to be filled, not on the figure boundary itself. Filling
occurs in all directions, stopping at the color of boundary.


Return Value

The _floodfill functions return a nonzero value if the fill is successful.
It returns 0 if the fill could not be completed, the starting point lies on
the boundary color, or the start point lies outside the clipping region.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS  ▼ OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

_ellipse functions,  _getcolor,  _getfillmask,  _grstatus,  _pie functions,
_setfillmask, _setcliprgn,  _setcolor


Example

    /* FLOODFIL.C: This program draws a series of nested rectangles in
    * different colors, constantly changing the background color.
    */

    #include <conio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <graph.h>

    void main()
    {
        int loop;
        int xvar, yvar;

        /* find a valid graphics mode */
        if( !_setvideomode( _MAXCOLORMODE ) )
        exit( 1 );

        for( xvar = 163, loop = 0; xvar < 320; loop++, xvar += 3 )
        {
        _setcolor( loop % 16 );
        yvar = xvar * 5 / 8;
        _rectangle( _GBORDER, 320-xvar, 200-yvar, xvar, yvar );
        _setcolor( rand() % 16 );
        _floodfill( 0, 0, loop % 16 );
        }
        getch();
        _setvideomode( _DEFAULTMODE );
    }





floor, floorl
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculate the floor of a value.

    #include <math.h>

    double floor( double x );

    long double floorl( long double x );

x                                 Floating-point value


Remarks

The floor and floorl functions return a floating-point value representing
the largest integer that is less than or equal to x.

The floorl function is the 80-bit counterpart, and it uses the 80-bit,
10-byte coprocessor form of arguments and return values. See the reference
page on the long double functions for more details on this data type.


Return Value

These functions return the floating-point result. There is no error return.



Compatibility

floor

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


floorl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

ceil, fmod


Example

    /* FLOOR.C: This example displays the largest integers less than or equal
    * to the floating-point values 2.8 and -2.8. It then shows the smallest
    * integers greater than or equal to 2.8 and -2.8.
    */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        double y;

        y = floor( 2.8 );
        printf( "The floor of 2.8 is %f\n", y );
        y = floor( -2.8 );
        printf( "The floor of -2.8 is %f\n", y );

        y = ceil( 2.8 );
        printf( "The ceil of 2.8 is %f\n", y );
        y = ceil( -2.8 );
        printf( "The ceil of -2.8 is %f\n", y );
    }


Output



    The floor of 2.8 is 2.000000
    The floor of -2.8 is -3.000000
    The ceil of 2.8 is 3.000000
    The ceil of -2.8 is -2.000000





flushall
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Flushes all streams; clears all buffers.

    #include <stdio.h>

    int flushall( void );


Remarks

The flushall function writes to its associated files the contents of all
buffers associated with open output streams. All buffers associated with
open input streams are cleared of their current contents. The next read
operation (if there is one) then reads new data from the input files into
the buffers.

Buffers are automatically flushed when they are full, when streams are
closed, or when a program terminates normally without closing streams.

All streams remain open after the call to flushall.


Return Value

The flushall function returns the number of open streams (input and output).
There is no error return.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

fflush


Example

    /* FLUSHALL.C: This program uses flushall to flush all open buffers. */

    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int numflushed;

        numflushed = flushall();
        printf( "There were %d streams flushed\n", numflushed );
    }


Output



    There were 3 streams flushed





fmod, fmodl
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Calculates the floating-point remainder.

    #include <math.h>

    double fmod( double x, double y );

    long double fmodl( long double x, long double y );

x, y                              Floating-point values


Remarks

The fmod and fmodl functions calculate the floating-point remainder f of x /
y  such that x = i * y + f, where i is an integer,  f  has the same sign as
x, and the absolute value of  f  is less than the absolute value of y.

The fmodl function is the 80-bit counterpart; it uses the 80-bit, 10-byte
coprocessor form of arguments and return values. See the discussion of the
long double functions for more details on this data type.


Return Value

These functions return the floating-point remainder. If y is 0, the function
returns 0.


Compatibility

fmod

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


fmodl

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

ceil, fabs, floor


Example

    /* FMOD.C: This program displays a floating-point remainder. */

    #include <math.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        double x = -10.0, y = 3.0, z;

        z = fmod( x, y );
        printf( "The remainder of %.2f / %.2f is %f\n", x, y, z );
    }


Output



    The remainder of -10.00 / 3.00 is -1.000000





fopen
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Opens a file.

    #include <stdio.h>

    FILE *fopen( const char *filename, const char *mode );

filename                          Path name of file

mode                              Type of access permitted


Remarks

The fopen function opens the file specified by filename. The character
string mode specifies the type of access requested for the file, as follows:


Type                              Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
"r"                               Opens for reading. If the file does not
                                    exist or cannot be found, the fopen call
                                    will fail.

"w"                               Opens an empty file for writing. If the
                                    given file exists, its contents are
                                    destroyed.

"a"                               Opens for writing at the end of the file
                                    (appending); creates the file first if
                                    it doesn't exist.

"r+"                              Opens for both reading and writing. (The
                                    file must exist.)

"w+"                              Opens an empty file for both reading and
                                    writing. If the given file exists, its
                                    contents are destroyed.

"a+"                              Opens for reading and appending; creates
                                    the file first if it doesn't exist.

When a file is opened with the "a" or "a+" access type, all write operations
occur at the end of the file. Although the file pointer can be repositioned
using fseek or rewind, the file pointer is always moved back to the end of
the file before any write operation is carried out. Thus, existing data
cannot be overwritten.

When the "r+", "w+", or "a+" access type is specified, both reading and
writing are allowed (the file is said to be open for "update"). However,
when you switch between reading and writing, there must be an intervening
fsetpos, fseek, or rewind operation. The current position can be specified
for the fsetpos or fseek operation, if desired.

In addition to the values listed above, one of the following characters can
be included in mode to specify the translation mode for newline characters:


Mode                              Meaning
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
t                                 Open in text (translated) mode. In this
                                    mode, carriage-return-line-feed (CR-LF)
                                    combinations are translated into single
                                    line feeds (LF) on input and LF
                                    characters are translated to CR-LF
                                    combinations on output. Also, CTRL+Z is
                                    interpreted as an end-of-file character
                                    on input. In files opened for reading or
                                    for reading/writing, fopen checks for a
                                    CTRL+Z at the end of the file and
                                    removes it, if possible. This is done
                                    because using the fseek and ftell
                                    functions to move within a file that
                                    ends with a CTRL+Z may cause fseek to
                                    behave improperly near the end of the
                                    file.

b                                 Open in binary (untranslated) mode; the
                                    above translations are suppressed.

If t or b is not given in mode, the translation mode is defined by the
default-mode variable _fmode. If t or b is prefixed to the argument, the
function will fail and return NULL.

See Section 2.7, "Input and Output," for a discussion of text and binary
modes.


Return Value

The fopen function returns a pointer to the open file. A null pointer value
indicates an error.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


Note that the t option is not part of the ANSI standard for fopen; it is a
Microsoft extension and should not be used where ANSI portability is
desired.


See Also

fclose, fcloseall, fdopen, ferror, fileno, freopen, open, setmode


Example

    /* FOPEN.C: This program opens files named "data" and "data2". It uses
    * fclose to close "data" and fcloseall to close all remaining files.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    FILE *stream, *stream2;

    void main()
    {
        int numclosed;

        /* Open for read (will fail if 'data' does not exist) */
        if( (stream  = fopen( "data", "r" )) == NULL )
        printf( "The file 'data' was not opened\n" );
        else
        printf( "The file 'data' was opened\n" );

        /* Open for write */
        if( (stream2 = fopen( "data2", "w+" )) == NULL )
        printf( "The file 'data2' was not opened\n" );
        else
        printf( "The file 'data2' was opened\n" );

        /* Close stream */
        if( fclose( stream ) )
        printf( "The file 'data' was not closed\n" );

        /* All other files are closed: */
        numclosed = fcloseall( );
        printf( "Number of files closed by fcloseall: %u\n", numclosed );
    }


Output



    The file 'data' was opened
    The file 'data2' was opened
    Number of files closed by fcloseall: 1





FP_OFF, FP_SEG
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Get or set a far-pointer offset (FP_OFF) or a far-pointer segment (FP_SEG).


    #include <dos.h>

    unsigned FP_OFF( void _far *address );

    unsigned FP_SEG( void _far *address );

address                           Far pointer to memory address


Remarks

The FP_OFF and FP_SEG macros can be used to set or get the offset and
segment, respectively, of the far pointer at address.


Return Value

The FP_OFF macro returns an offset. The FP_SEG macro returns a segment
address.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



Example

    /* FP_SEG.C: This program uses FP_SEG and FP_OFF to obtain
    * the segment and offset of the long pointer p.
    */

    #include <dos.h>
    #include <malloc.h>
    #include <stdio.h>


    void main()
    {
        void _far *p;
        unsigned int seg_val;
        unsigned int off_val;

        p = _fmalloc( 100 );        /* Points pointer at something */

        seg_val = FP_SEG( p );      /* Gets address pointed to */
        off_val = FP_OFF( p );

        printf( "Segment is %.4X; Offset is %.4X\n", seg_val, off_val );
    }


Output



    Segment is 00C7; Offset is 0016





_fpreset
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Resets the floating-point package.

    #include <float.h>

    void _fpreset( void );


Remarks

The _fpreset function reinitializes the floating-point-math package. This
function is usually used in conjunction with signal, system, or the exec or
spawn functions.

If a program traps floating-point error signals (SIGFPE) with signal, it can
safely recover from floating-point errors by invoking _fpreset and using
longjmp.

In DOS versions prior to 3.0, a child process executed by exec, spawn, or
system may affect the floating-point state of the parent process if an 8087
or 80287 coprocessor is used. If you are using either coprocessor, the
following precautions are recommended:


    ■   The exec, spawn, and system functions should not be called during the
        evaluation of a floating-point expression.

    ■   The _fpreset function should be called after these routines if there
        is a possibility of the child process performing any floating-point
        operations.



Return Value

None.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

exec functions, signal, spawn functions


Example

    /* FPRESET.C: This program uses signal to set up a routine for handling
    * floating-point errors.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <signal.h>
    #include <setjmp.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <float.h>
    #include <math.h>
    #include <string.h>

    jmp_buf mark;                       /* Address for long jump to jump to */
    int  fperr;                         /* Global error number */

    void fphandler( int sig, int num ); /* Prototypes */
    void fpcheck( void );

    void main()
    {
        double n1, n2, r;
        int jmpret;

        /* Set up floating point error handler. */
        if( signal( SIGFPE, fphandler ) == SIG_ERR )
        {
            fprintf( stderr, "Couldn't set SIGFPE\n" );
            abort();
        }

        /* Save stack environment for return in case of error. First time
        * through, jmpret is 0, so true conditional is executed. If an
        * error occurs, jmpret will be set to -1 and false conditional
        * will be executed.
        */
        jmpret = setjmp( mark );
        if( jmpret == 0 )
        {
            printf( "Test for invalid operation - " );
            printf( "enter two numbers: " );
            scanf( "%lf %lf", &n1, &n2 );

            r = n1 / n2;
            /* This won't be reached if error occurs. */
            printf( "\n\n%4.3g / %4.3g = %4.3g\n", n1, n2, r );

            r = n1 * n2;
            /* This won't be reached if error occurs. */
            printf( "\n\n%4.3g * %4.3g = %4.3g\n", n1, n2, r );
        }
        else
            fpcheck();
    }

    /* Handles SIGFPE (floating point error) interrupt. */
    void fphandler( int sig, int num )
    {
        /* Set global for outside check since we don't want to do I/O in the
        * handler.
        */
        fperr = num;

        /* Initialize floating-point package. */
        _fpreset();

        /* Restore calling environment and jump back to setjmp. Return -1
        * so that setjmp will return false for conditional test.
        */
        longjmp( mark, -1 );
    }

    void fpcheck()
    {
        char fpstr[30];

        switch( fperr )
        {
            case FPE_INVALID:
                strcpy( fpstr, "Invalid number" );
                break;

            case FPE_OVERFLOW:
                strcpy( fpstr, "Overflow" );
                break;

            case FPE_UNDERFLOW:
                strcpy( fpstr, "Underflow" );
                break;

            case FPE_ZERODIVIDE:
                strcpy( fpstr, "Divide by zero" );
                break;

            default:
                strcpy( fpstr, "Other floating point error" );
                break;
        }
        printf( "Error %d: %s\n", fperr, fpstr );
    }


Output



    Test for invalid operation - enter two numbers: 5 0
    Error 131: Divide by zero





fprintf
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Prints formatted data to a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    int fprintf( FILE *stream, const char *format [[, argument]]... );

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure

format                            Format-control string

argument                          Optional arguments


Remarks

The fprintf function formats and prints a series of characters and values to
the output stream. Each argument (if any) is converted and output according
to the corresponding format specification in format.

The format argument has the same form and function that it does for the
printf function; see the Remarks section for the printf function for more
information on format and argument.


Return Value

The fprintf function returns the number of characters printed, or a negative
value in the case of an output error.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

cprintf, fscanf, printf, sprintf


Example

    /* FPRINTF.C: This program uses fprintf to format various data and
    * print them to the file named FPRINTF.OUT. It then displays
    * FPRINTF.OUT on the screen using the system function to invoke
    * the DOS TYPE command.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <process.h>

    FILE *stream;

    void main()
    {
        int    i = 10;
        double fp = 1.5;
        char   s[] = "this is a string";
        char   c = '\n';

        stream = fopen( "fprintf.out", "w" );
        fprintf( stream, "%s%c", s, c );
        fprintf( stream, "%d\n", i );
        fprintf( stream, "%f\n", fp );
        fclose( stream );
        system( "type fprintf.out" );
    }


Output



    this is a string
    10
    1.500000





fputc, fputchar
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Write a character to a stream (fputc) or to stdout (fputchar).

    #include <stdio.h>

    int fputc( int c, FILE *stream );

    int fputchar( int c );

c                                 Character to be written

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The fputc function writes the single character c to the output stream at the
current position. The fputchar function is equivalent to fputc(c, stdout).

The fputc and fputchar routines are similar to putc and putchar, but are
functions rather than macros.


Return Value

The fputc and fputchar functions return the character written. A return
value of EOF indicates an error.


Compatibility

fputc

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


fputchar

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

fgetc, fgetchar, putc, putchar


Example

    /* FPUTC.C: This program uses fputc and fputchar to send a character
    * array to stdout.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        char strptr1[] = "This is a test of fputc!!\n";
        char strptr2[] = "This is a test of fputchar!!\n";
        char *p;

        /* Print line to stream using fputc. */
        p = strptr1;
        while( (*p != '\0') && fputc( *(p++), stdout ) != EOF )
        ;

        /* Print line to stream using fputchar. */
        p = strptr2;
        while( (*p != '\0') && fputchar( *(p++) ) != EOF )
        ;
    }


Output



    This is a test of fputc!!
    This is a test of fputchar!!





fputs
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Writes a string to a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    int fputs( const char *string, FILE *stream );

string                            String to be output

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The fputs function copies string to the output stream at the current
position. The terminating null character ('\0') is not copied.


Return Value

The fputs function returns a nonnegative value if it is successful. If an
error occurs, it returns EOF.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

fgets, gets, puts


Example

    /* FPUTS.C: This program uses fputs to write a single line to the
    * stdout stream.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        fputs( "Hello world from fputs.\n", stdout );
    }


Output



    Hello world from fputs.





fread
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Reads data from a stream.

    #include <stdio.h>

    size_t fread( void *buffer, size_t size, size_t count, FILE *stream );

buffer                            Storage location for data

size                              Item size in bytes

count                             Maximum number of items to be read

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The fread function reads up to count items of size bytes from the input
stream and stores them in buffer. The file pointer associated with stream
(if there is one) is increased by the number of bytes actually read.

If the given stream is opened in text mode, carriage-return-line-feed pairs
are replaced with single line-feed characters. The replacement has no effect
on the file pointer or the return value.

The file-pointer position is indeterminate if an error occurs. The value of
a partially read item cannot be determined.


Return Value

The fread function returns the number of full items actually read, which may
be less than count if an error occurs or if the file end is encountered
before reaching count.

The feof or ferror function should be used to distinguish a read error from
an end-of-file condition. If size or count is 0, fread returns 0 and the
buffer contents are unchanged.


Compatibility

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX



See Also

fwrite, read


Example

    /* FREAD.C: This program opens a file named FREAD.OUT and writes 25
    * characters to the file. It then tries to open FREAD.OUT and
    * read in 25 characters. If the attempt succeeds, the program
    * displays the number of actual items read.
    */

    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        FILE *stream;
        char list[30];
        int  i, numread, numwritten;

        /* Open file in text mode: */
        if( (stream = fopen( "fread.out", "w+t" )) != NULL )
        {
        for ( i = 0; i < 25; i++ )
            list[i] = 'z' - i;
        /* Write 25 characters to stream */
        numwritten = fwrite( list, sizeof( char ), 25, stream );
        printf( "Wrote %d items\n", numwritten );
        fclose( stream );
        }
        else
        printf( "Problem opening the file\n" );

        if( (stream = fopen( "fread.out", "r+t" )) != NULL )
        {
        /* Attempt to read in 25 characters */
        numread = fread( list, sizeof( char ), 25, stream );
        printf( "Number of items read = %d\n", numread );
        printf( "Contents of buffer = %.25s\n", list );
        fclose( stream );
        }
        else
        printf( "Was not able to open the file\n" );
    }


Output



    Wrote 25 items
    Number of items read = 25
    Contents of buffer = zyxwvutsrqponmlkjihgfedcb





free Functions
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Deallocate a memory block.

#include <stdlib.h>               For ANSI compatibility (free only)

#include <malloc.h>               Required only for function declarations

    void free( void *memblock );

    void _bfree( _segment seg, void _based( void ) *memblock );

    void _ffree( void _far *memblock );

    void _nfree( void _near *memblock );

memblock                          Allocated memory block

seg                               Based-heap segment selector


Remarks

The free family of functions deallocates a memory block. The argument
memblock points to a memory block previously allocated through a call to
calloc, malloc, or realloc. The number of bytes freed is the number of bytes
specified when the block was allocated (or reallocated, in the case of
realloc). After the call, the freed block is available for allocation.

The seg argument specifies the based heap containing the memory block to be
freed by the _bfree function.

Attempting to free an invalid pointer may affect subsequent allocation and
cause errors. An invalid pointer is one not allocated with the appropriate
call.

The following restrictions apply to use of the free, _bfree, _ffree, and
_nfree functions:

Blocks allocated with:            Should be freed with:
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
calloc, malloc, realloc           free

_bcalloc, _bmalloc, _brealloc     _bfree

_fcalloc, _fmalloc, _frealloc     _ffree

_ncalloc, _nmalloc, _nrealloc     _nfree

A NULL pointer argument is ignored.

In large data models (compact-, large-, and huge-model programs), free maps
to _ffree. In small data models (tiny-, small-, and medium-model programs),
free maps to _nfree.

The various free functions deallocate a memory block in the segments shown
in the list below:

Function                          Data Segment
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
free                              Depends on data model of program

_bfree                            Based heap specified by seg value

_ffree                            Far heap (outside default data segment)

_nfree                            Near heap (inside default data segment)


Return Value

None.


Compatibility

free

    ANSI   DOS   OS/2   UNIX   XENIX


_bfree, _ffree, _nfree

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

calloc functions, malloc functions, realloc functions


Example

    /* MALLOC.C: This program allocates memory with malloc, then frees
    * the memory with free.
    */

    #include <stdlib.h>         /* Definition of _MAX_PATH */
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <malloc.h>

    void main()
    {
        char *string;

        /* Allocate space for a path name */
        string = malloc( _MAX_PATH );
        if( string == NULL )
        printf( "Insufficient memory available\n" );
        else
        printf( "Memory space allocated for path name\n" );
        free( string );
        printf( "Memory freed\n" );
    }


Output



    Memory space allocated for path name
    Memory freed





_freect
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Returns the amount of memory available for memory allocation.

#include <malloc.h>               Required only for function declarations

    unsigned int _freect( size_t size );

size                              Item size in bytes


Remarks

The _freect function tells you how much memory is available for dynamic
memory allocation in the near heap. It does so by returning the approximate
number of times your program can call _nmalloc (or malloc in small data
models) to allocate an item size bytes long in the near heap (default data
segment).


Return Value

The _freect function returns the number of calls as an unsigned integer.


Compatibility

▼ ANSI   DOS   OS/2  ▼ UNIX  ▼ XENIX



See Also

calloc functions, _expand functions, malloc functions, _memavl, _msize
functions,  realloc functions


Example

    /* FREECT.C: This program determines how much free space is available for
    * integers in the default data segment. Then it allocates space for
    * 1,000 integers and checks the space again, using _freect.
    */

    #include <malloc.h>
    #include <stdio.h>

    void main()
    {
        int i;

        /* First report on the free space: */
        printf( "Integers (approximate) available on heap: %u\n\n",
                _freect( sizeof( int ) ) );

        /* Allocate space for 1000 integers: */
        for( i = 0; i < 1000; ++i )
        malloc( sizeof( int ) );

    /* Report again on the free space: */
        printf( "After allocating space for 1000 integers:\n" );
        printf( "Integers (approximate) available on heap: %u\n\n",
                _freect( sizeof( int ) ) );

    }


Output



    Integers (approximate) available on heap: 15212

    After allocating space for 1000 integers:
    Integers (approximate) available on heap: 14084





freopen
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────


Description

Reassigns a file pointer.

    #include <stdio.h>

    FILE *freopen( const char *filename, const char *mode, FILE *stream );

filename                          Path name of new file

mode                              Type of access permitted

stream                            Pointer to FILE structure


Remarks

The freopen function closes the file currently associated with stream and
reassigns stream to the file specified by filename. The freopen function is
typically used to redirect the pre-opened files stdin, stdout, and stderr to
files specified by the user. The new file associated with stream is opened
with mode, which is a character string specifying the type of access
requested for the file, as follows:

Type                              Description
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
"r"                               Opens for reading. If the file does not
                                    exist or cannot be found, the freopen
                                    call fails.

"w"                               Opens an empty file for writing. If the
                                    given file exists, its contents are
                                    destroyed.

"a"                               Opens for writing at the end of the file
                                    (appending); creates the file first if
                                    it does not exist.

"r+"                              Opens for both reading and writing. (The
                                    file must exist.)

"w+"                              Opens an empty file for both reading and
                                    writing. If the given file exists, its
                                    contents are destroyed.

"a+"                              Opens for reading and appending; creates
                                    the file first if it does not exist.

Use the "w" and "w+" types with care, as they can destroy existing files.

When a file is opened with the "a" or "a+" access type, all write operations
take place at the end of the file. Although the file pointer can be
repositioned using fseek or rewind, the file pointer is always moved back to
the end of the file before any write operation is carried out. Thus,
existing data cannot be overwritten.

When the "r+", "w+", or "a+" access type is specified, both reading and
writing are allowed (the file is said to be open for "update"). However,
when you switch between reading and writing, there must be an intervening
fsetpos, fseek, or rewind operation. The current position can be specified
for the fsetpos or fseek operation, if desired.

In addition to the values listed above, one of the following characters may
be included in t